Photo by Richard Burlton on Unsplash

We are living in strange times.

People are fighting over toilet paper and stealing medical supplies from hospitals. Grocery store shelves are empty. Cities and countries are on lockdown. A record 3.3 million Americans filed for unemployment just last week. And Congress passed the largest emergency aid package in US history ($2 trillion). Not to mention how many high profile people — like Prince Charles, British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, Senator Paul Rand, and Hollywood’s sweethearts, Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson — have all tested positive for COVID-19.

It’s safe to say that it feels like the sky is falling. So what do you do when it feels that way? Here are 10 things that are helping me.

1. Give yourself permission to worry (and not worry)

Thinking about things lets us take the information we have, reflect on it, and purposefully make decisions. Worrying about things is when that thinking becomes obsessive and repetitive, focusing more on worst-case scenarios than anything else.

Worrying is normal, especially in moments that impact us so profoundly.

It’s times like right now that make worrying feel more like a responsibility. It’s a sign of being compassionate and often ties us to each other. But constant worrying can negatively impact our health.

Not only does it impact our mood, sleep patterns, and digestive issues, but chronic worrying directly impacts our immune response by decreasing the body’s lymphocytes (our white blood cells that fight off infections and viruses). And right now our immune systems need all the help they can get.

In order to honor any worries you may have, while making sure they don’t take over, consider scheduling time to worry. As ridiculous as it sounds, research shows this cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) technique can decrease feelings of anxiousness and time spent worrying. I did this yesterday for 15 minutes — when I found myself stuck in worry mode — and it helped tremendously.

Also give yourself permission not to worry.

I think sometimes we need permission to not worry all the time, especially when others are worrying.

We live in an anxious world. It’s okay not to get sucked into that every minute. It’s okay to focus our energy on what we can control.

It’s also okay if you aren’t able to get out of an anxious spiral. Things are scary right now. Be kind to yourself.

2. Focus on what you can control

For years, I have been doing an exercise that helps me reduce my anxiety and gives me a sense of control.

I draw two circles and label each one “Things I can’t control” and “Things I can control.” Then I take a few minutes to fill out each circle with, you guessed it, things I can control and things I can’t. (Sometimes I add a third circle “Things I have some control over,” if it feels necessary.)

While this may sound ridiculously simple — or silly — there is something about this exercise that, ironically, gives me a sense of control. In just a few short minutes, it clearly defines where I should focus my attention. It acts as a roadmap, providing some measure of certainty…and isn’t that what we long for in stressful and uncertain times, some sort of direction?

As someone who has two kids, two elderly parents, a business I am still trying to run, AND I am awaiting the results of my own COVID-19 test (someone I came in contact with tested positive), this has been incredibly useful in helping me manage anxiety related to this chaos.

I can’t control who I have already been exposed to. I can’t control if I test positive. I also can’t control if my family tests positive or the decisions made by businesses and governments.

But I can control how much media I consume, how often I wash my hands, how much I am sleeping, how I choose to spend my time, and how I discuss this bizarre situation with my kids.

I can also choose how to treat other people, how often I check in on friends and family, and what I do with the extra time or resources I have.

3. Disconnect

While it is important to stay informed, constantly monitoring the latest news may not be so good for your mental wellbeing. A 2017 survey conducted by the American Psychological Association found that 95% of adults follow the news regularly, and 56% admitted this causes them stress. This aligns with previous research that found watching the news triggers persisting negative psychological feelings.

With everything going on right now, many of us are closely monitoring the latest COVID-19 news. To help combat the negative effects of watching the news, consider turning off phone notifications from news outlets, limiting your TV news consumption per day, as well as limiting social media. I give myself 15 minutes for news and 15 minutes for social media.

Many of us still get bombarded with news — or people talking about the news — on social media, and previous research has shown that limiting social media decreases loneliness and depression. While it can be a good way to stay connected during this “social distancing,” be mindful of what you are consuming on social media and how it is affecting your mental wellbeing.

If you feel the urge for some news, consider adding in some that’s positive. Good News Network reports positive news stories from around the world and considers themselves “an antidote to the barrage of negativity experienced in the mainstream media.”

4. Reconnect

Disconnecting a little from news or social media can be hard when we are so disconnected from each other in real life right now. Humans are social creatures — we need human connection — so being socially isolated negatively impacts our wellbeing.

Even though we are “social distancing” ourselves, we can — and should — still stay connected.

In a world where most of us text instead of call, this is a good time to reconnect with people by picking up the phone or using FaceTime. The absence of being able to connect in real life may give us an opportunity to connect more virtually. I have been using FaceTime to stay connected to family and I have started scheduling “FaceTime dates” with friends.

I am also trying to use this as an opportunity to spend quality time with my husband and kids — playing outside, making forts, creating art, and having dance parties in the living room. If you live with other people, this is an opportunity to connect with them. If you live alone, it is especially important that you find ways to connect with others virtually.

5. Move

Whether it’s a formal exercise routine or a walk around your neighborhood, movement improves mood, reduces anxiety, and boosts your immune system — three things most of us probably need right about now. Because movement promotes good circulation, it allows cells to move throughout the body easily and it helps your immune system do its job more effectively.

Exercise also releases endorphins — our feel-good hormones, which improve mood and makes us feel better. And research suggests that regular exercise can reduce anxiety by making your brain’s fight-or-flight response less reactive. This is especially helpful for those of us who are prone to anxiety.

Exercise can make us less likely to panic when faced with a stressful situation.

If you love a workout, keep doing it at home — there are a number of gyms offering online workouts and there are thousands of free exercise videos on YouTube.

And if you don’t like working out, just moving for a little bit throughout the day can help boost mood. (So can being outside in nature.)

In order to stave off depression, experts recommend at least 15 minutes a day of higher-intensity exercise, such as running, dancing, or jumping rope, or at least an hour of lower-intensity exercise, such as walking, housework, or yoga.

Obviously avoid exercise if you have a fever, respiratory symptoms, body aches, or other feelings of malaise. It’s important to take care of yourself right now. If that means sitting on the couch and binge-watching Netflix, that’s okay. Be kind to yourself. When you are ready to move, remember a little bit goes a long way.

6. Rest

With all of the current panic and fear, this is a good time to remind people how incredibly important sleep is for our health. While it sounds simple — and is often very overlooked — getting sufficient sleep (7–9 hours per night) can help regulate immune function.

Conversely, not getting enough sleep, particularly less than 6 hours per night, has been associated with an increased risk of respiratory infections. When you sleep, your body produces and releases cytokines, a type of protein that targets infection and inflammation, creating an immune response.

When you don’t get enough sleep, your body makes fewer cytokines, which impacts your immune response to things like a virus.

One of the very best things we can do for ourselves right now (and always) is prioritize sleep.

If you are having trouble getting enough sleep at night, consider taking a 30-minute nap during the day (before 3pm so you don’t impact your night-time sleep). Naps have been shown to decrease stress and reduce the negative effects that lack of sleep has on your immune system.

7. Declutter

Now that I have what feels like infinite time on my hands — and two kids at home which makes working difficult — I am finding myself tackling the clutter in nearly every room of our house. This has been on our to-do list for so long but, with the regular demands of daily life, we haven’t prioritized it…until now.

It took COVID-19 to get us to tackle our clutter.

Considering that a cluttered environment contributes to stress, reduces focus and productivity, and has been linked to poorer mental health and overall wellbeing, using this time to clear out the clutter isn’t a bad idea. Not only does it give us something to focus on, it can create a sense of control (by controlling our space) when many of us are feeling out of control. I have found it incredibly cathartic.

8. Wash your hands

Yes, we are all being told at every twist and turn to wash our hands; it’s almost annoying. But considering that only 31% of men and 65% of women wash their hands after using the bathroom (gross), and most of us touch our face an average of 23 times in an hour, it’s safe to say we need this reminder.

And health experts urge this is the single most important thing we can do right now to stop the spread and reduce the likelihood of contracting the virus. Hand washing not only removes any unknown agents from our hands, but the soap also breaks those agents apart.

Soap can break apart the virus, making it less likely to infect you.

This is huge. If you do nothing else, wash your hands as much as possible, especially after coming in contact with people and things outside your home, and especially before you touch your face or eat food.

9. Recognize privilege

These are tough times for most of us. My family’s primary source of income is a small business that depends on people working, packages being shipped, and a host of other factors that lie in jeopardy. My business — which is solely run by me — is dependent on me being able to create new content regularly, which is proving difficult with two young kids at home.

BUT I am able to stay home with my kids while schools are closed; I am able to work from home and purchase two week’s worth of food at a time; and I am able to access the healthcare system should I need it.

Considering that only one-third of the work-force is able to work from home, nearly 40% of Americans don’t have $400 in savings to cover an emergency, and 22 million children in the United States rely on the free or reduced-price lunch they receive at school, these are privileges I don’t take lightly.

If previous pandemics and recessions are any indication, low-income workers and minorities will be hit hardest both from a health and economic standpoint.

It’s the people who have to make the choice between caring for their kids or earning wages to support them; it’s the people who don’t even have a choice because the restaurant or business they work for has closed; it’s the people who have a harder time socially distancing themselves because they have to earn a living and/or because they live in close-quartered, multi-family complexes; and it’s the people who are minority business owners who, despite growing 10 times faster than overall small businesses in the US, are less likely to be approved for small business loans.

Recognizing privilege doesn’t mean we can’t be sad for how we are being impacted. I know I am. I am sad my business is slowing down because I don’t have the hours I previously had to work. I am struggling with being at home 24/7 with my kids, even though I love them and I am trying to appreciate this time with them. And I am sad that we have to cancel my upcoming 40th birthday trip. But that doesn’t mean I can’t also recognize the privilege I have.

We can recognize our privilege while simultaneously having feelings about our own situation. The two can coexist.

But if we are going to talk about what to do when it feels like the sky is falling, we can’t have that conversation without considering privilege and how others are being impacted.

10. Replace “I” with “We”

As I have watched everything unfold these past few weeks, I keep coming back to a Malcolm X quote I heard years ago: “When “I” is replaced by “we,” illness becomes wellness.” This quote feels especially relevant.

As important as it is for each of us to take care of ourselves — and it is — we also have to take care of the larger community, especially as we think about the impact this pandemic will have, particularly on those of us who are less privileged.

“Shouting ‘self-care’ at people who actually need community care is how we fail people.” — Nakita Valerio

On an individual level, community-care means showing up for others and using whatever position or privilege you have to help others.

It means:

Sharing what resources you have rather than hoarding them;

Doing whatever you can to help someone in need;

Operating from a place of abundance rather than scarcity;

Staying home — regardless of if you think you are infected — so that you don’t potentially spread this to your neighbor’s dad, your friend’s asthmatic child, or the people who can’t stay home;

And having tough conversations about the systemic issues that make so many people vulnerable not just to pandemics, such as this, but to everyday life.

I hope the silver lining in this is that it sparks a national conversation around our larger issues. I am hoping that as a country we can start to have a real conversation around paid leave, access to healthcare, privilege, poverty, and so many important issues this pandemic is bringing to the foreground.

Individual and community wellbeing will depend on the conversations we have and the actions we take.

Perhaps the best thing we can do when it feels like the sky is falling is to replace “I” with “we.”

Moving forward

As things continue to unfold, we can’t know what will come next. The most unsettling thing about this virus is the uncertainty that accompanies it. We don’t know how long this will last, how devastating the effects will be, or what the long-term ramifications will be. All we know is that we have today.

While uncertainty often breeds anxiety, I am choosing to sit with the words of the 19th-century Swiss philosopher, Henri Frederic Amiel: “Uncertainty is the refuge of hope.”

As hard as it is to feel hopeful right now, maybe this uncertainty will cause us to slow down, focus on what really matters, and help us take better care of ourselves and each other.

Maybe we can find hope in this uncertainty. Maybe we can do better on the other side of this.

Sending love to anyone who reads this. We are all in this together.