Instant gratification

I totally understand that sensationalist titles give our lay audience the precise dopamine surge they need to click/tap on our articles. That being said, they may be human, but they’re not stupid. An overabundance of these kinds of headlines will eventually dilute your article to almost nothing in the eyes of most readers through a process called desensitization. If every article touts something the reader must read, eventually they’re going to stop believing in the power that you can have to bring them new and useful information.

We need to draw the reader in with our continued track record of being personable and vulnerable in our writing, so that when they see our name, they know what they’re getting. Now I realize that these aren’t the roaring 20s, and by now we’ve diluted our ability to have such clout when anyone with an iPhone can publish an article, but stay with me here.

False promises

A title that proclaims the enclosed article has all the answers sets up the reader for failure (i.e. “Here’s how to…” or “…will change your life”). I have read some really wonderful writing here on Medium from very qualified and expert people in their field. However, not every reader has the same level of insight, and at the end of that 5-minute read, some may be left feeling disappointed.

Self-help has it’s place, but personally I like to think of it as “standardized psychotherapy”, and psychotherapy is most certainly not one size fits all. My biggest fear as a mental health provider is that readers walk away from self-help articles feeling dejected and having lost faith in the whole notion that they can improve.

My point here is that our writing isn’t just something to be consumed.

“Self-help” doesn’t have to be a solitary activity

When a title reads “X reasons why you should/shouldn’t…”, this immediately drives a wedge between author and reader. The reader is made to believe that the author has more authority and well, they better listen up. It tells the reader, “These are the only reasons that matter, and if you can’t keep up, then you’re screwed.”

In medical school we are taught the different ways doctors can interact with patients and the effect that these relationship styles can have on patient outcomes. It is becoming standard practice now (at least amongst my generation in the United States) that physicians be open to discussion, as a paternalistic style often drives patients away from clinics and hospitals and results in poor medication adherence.

With all the tools we have to engage with our audience, why shouldn’t a piece of writing encourage dialogue? Or even monologue (on the part of the reader), for that matter.