Notes on storing butter and buttermilk

Once made, you can either refrigerate the butter or keep it on the countertop where, because it is cultured, it will remain spreadable and keep for several months. Buttermilk, when refrigerated, keeps for about 1-1/2 weeks. You can store butter in the freezer nearly indefinitely, but most frozen food diminishes considerably after about a year.

Note that light degrades fats and butter picks up odors, both of which should impact your choice of storage container. For the refrigerator or freezer, a glass or ceramic container works best. When storing butter outside the refrigerator, protecting it from light preserves its flavor and keeps it fresher longer. Room-temperature butter should be slightly cool, soft but not melty.

Notes on perfecting the process

Using cultured versus sweet cream butter. Adding a culture to cream before turning it into butter imparts depth and complexity by adding bacteria that promote thickness as well as acid development; the latter lowers the pH, which thickens and stabilizes the butter and extends its shelf life. Sweet cream, or uncultured butter, has a simpler flavor and lasts only as long as the cream would have lasted before churning. The sweet buttermilk that is its by-product is nonacidic. So, unlike cultured buttermilk, it cannot be paired with baking soda to leaven baked goods. To use sweet cream buttermilk in baking, substitute 3/4 to 1 teaspoon baking powder for every 1/4 teaspoon of baking soda called for in the recipe.

Choosing a culture. The culture you use to make your butter will affect the flavor and personality of the finished product and, other than the cream you start with, it is what will give your butter its defining characteristics. This makes it especially important to learn about or sample several cultures from a supplier before settling on one for long-term use.

Handling the culture. Purchased culture should always be stored in the freezer, where it should stay until the moment you are ready to use it. Shake the container well, pour the amount of culture needed onto your measuring spoon, and then immediately put the culture back into the freezer. I have learned the hard way not to dip the spoon into the culture or leave the packet sitting at room temperature, as either could contaminate it.

Crème fraîche. At the end of culturing, before making butter, what you have is Crème fraîche. This is cream that is thickened and given a tart, buttery flavor by the cultures added for butter making. Less sour than sour cream, you can use it the way the French do as a substitute. Crème fraîche also works as a base for sauce because it doesn’t curdle; or you can serve it over fresh fruit or add it to soup or mashed potatoes.

Scaling up the recipe. If you want to scale this recipe up to make more butter and butter- milk, continue to use 1/8 teaspoon culture for quantities of cream under 2 gallons (8 quarts). For 2 to 5 gallons of cream (8 to 20 quarts), increase the quantity of culture to 1/4 teaspoon.

Churning butter by hand. It’s possible to make butter without a stand mixer, though it will take more time and muscle. Start with a glass jar about one- third filled with cream that is about 65 degrees. Shake the jar, watching for butter to form and buttermilk to separate. You may need to shake for quite some time before this happens. When you are sure you have butter, stop shaking, drain off the buttermilk, and rinse the butter as described in the recipe.

Adjusting the salt. If you begin making butter with more or less cream than is called for in this recipe and you want to make salted butter, use a quantity of salt that equals 1 to 2 percent of the finished butter weight, measured in grams (my own preference is for 1 percent). It’s best to use a flaked, non-iodized salt (or cheese salt) since granular salt crystals can get “caught” in the butter and fail to dissolve. Sea salt may work, although organisms in the salt can have a negative impact on flavor. Experimentation will be your best guide.

Making butter from raw (unpasteurized) cream

Before dairy was industrialized, fresh milk from the evening milking was commonly left out overnight for the cream to rise. Left at room temperature, the milk and cream became populated with with microorganisms that soured it slightly and created cultured, or clabbered, cream. This tangy mixture formed the basis of butter making.

Later, pasteurization was introduced, a process that prevented milk and cream from souring naturally. As a result, sweet cream butter came to dominate the market.

Since in most parts of the country, and in most countries of the world, unpasteurized raw cream is legal and available, we have the option of making butter the old-fashioned way. Culturing raw cream is easy to do, with or without a commercial culture, because raw cream is biologically active and full of beneficial bacteria that ferment and sour cream naturally if left at room temperature.

To use a purchased culture, follow the instructions above. To culture raw cream without a purchased culture, remove the cream from the refrigerator, pour it into a bowl or jar (I use a half-gallon glass canning jar), and cover it with a double layer of cheesecloth. If your kitchen is especially cool, you may want to heat the cream to 80 degrees. Otherwise, you can let it warm naturally.

Allow the cream to rest at room temperature for at least 6 hours or up to 24 hours, depending on how ripe you want the cream to be. If your kitchen is very warm, you may want to place the bowl or jar of cream in a container full of cool water to keep it from getting much warmer than 80 degrees.

You can use the cream for butter making at any stage of fermentation. When you are pleased with its flavor, cover the cream with an airtight lid and move it to the refrigerator, where you can store it for days or up to a week. As it ripens, the smell and taste should continue to be pleasing and become more interesting. The longer you ripen the cream before churning, the more intensely flavored your butter will be. Although I have never had this happen, if your cream curdles or smells or tastes “off,” discard it and begin again.

What’s nice about relying on the wild cultures in your own environment is that it’s easy and economical. The results, however, can be unpredictable. When you use wild cultures, you cannot be sure what qualities your butter will possess because the bacteria within your environment change all the time. So you might like the results one week, and not like them as well the next. I have also found that the buttermilk I get when I rely on wild cultures is thin and watery compared to the thick, rich buttermilk that commercial cultures give me. One is not necessarily better than the other, but my own preference is for a full-bodied buttermilk, and in my kitchen I have needed commercial cultures to create it.

You may want to think of it this way: Within your home environment, you have everything you need to culture raw cream before churning it into butter, just as people have had for all time. What purchased commercial cultures do for you is help you control the ripening process, allowing you to choose the qualities you want to impart and ensuring which beneficial microorganisms dominate.

Handcrafting any food is art as much as science; there is no precise formula. So the best approach may be to experiment to find the method you like best.