3. Master the art of taming

The main remedy to isolation isn’t love, but friendship. Love is what the little prince experiences with his rose. He loves his rose but the rose didn’t love him back. You take care of a rose watering it, cultivating it. Love doesn’t need to be reciprocal. And that’s not bad or good, it’s just the way it is. That’s one way to experience a relationship.

But it’s in his encounter with a fox where the little prince will find the meaning of friendship.

The fox is a wild animal. It needs to be tamed to make a relationship possible. The first time I read that I didn’t like it. The use of the verb “tame” didn’t look good to me. I don’t tame a person to make it my friend, I thought. I read it as a question of power and submission. I was wrong.

Now I know. Our relationship between humans is wild. Our first response when we meet another person is defensive. Which is normal and sane. We have to take care of ourselves. Friendship is wild. You have to work on it, make it less wild, more treatable, more docile. Domesticating is to bring someone home, to make it feel at home. A friend is someone you make part of your life, your internal house, a friend is to whom you establish ties.

“Just that,” said the fox. “To me, you are still nothing more than a little boy who is just like a hundred thousand other little boys. And I have no need of you. And you, on your part, have no need of me. To you, I am nothing more than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if you tame me, then we shall need each other. To me, you will be unique in all the world. To you, I shall be unique in all the world…”

Love as in loving-kindness and friendship is a form of presence. It requires time and patience. You can share adventures, learning, activities, tastes, objects or even experiences-chats, video-conferences, social networks — but the most important thing in a relationship is to be there for the other.

“You must be very patient,” replied the fox. “First you will sit down at a little distance from me — like that — in the grass. I shall look at you out of the corner of my eye, and you will say nothing. Words are the source of misunderstandings. But you will sit a little closer to me, every day…”

And those who tame become tamed. That’s why tameness is not a question of power versus submission but a question of responsiveness.

You become responsible, forever, for what you have tamed.

In the relationship between the little prince and the fox, taming is evident and obvious because the human tames the animal. But the same happens in the other friendship developed through the book: the pilot and the little prince. They are very different: in age, in occupation, in innocence… in a word, they are from different planets. We can see that the relationship is not easy for any of them. They have to tame each other.