Image by Nik Shuliahin via Unsplash.

Since social distancing has been brought into effect and my classes have all gone digital, I have found myself with a schedule characterized by a more relaxed pace.

In those crevices and corners of my day where I’m at a loss for doing something productive, I still attempt to fill the gap with something beneficial, whether it benefits myself or those around me. Here are a handful of the enjoyable ways I have been trying to stay busy.

Reading

Exposing oneself to great literature, whether it be educational or fantastical, can be a rather satisfying experience. As I especially seek to grow in my own writing, reading is one of the most influential pastimes that can foster that growth. Reading can also be a splendid type of escapism.

In addition to the readings for my classes and those of a personal Lenten observation, I’ve had more time on my hands — time that has been predominantly limited to the quarters of my own home.

With this extra time, I’ve been reading more news articles. I have been enjoying the poetry of John Crowe Ransom. And I’ve been reading excerpts from the works of C.S. Lewis, among other books I’ve been plowing through.

There’s the cliché out there that we’re constantly learning, and that is true. We can grow in our study of natural science and in our artistic style just as we can grow in our faith and friendships. Sipping in the writings of other authors can build up how we come to express ourselves in our writing and in all areas of our life.

Cooking

One of the books I’m digesting at the moment is John-Mark L. Miravalle’s Beauty: What It Is & Why It Matters. In it, he defends the culinary arts as being just as worthy of the recognition of creative excellence as any other art form.

For me, cooking is something that, either directly or indirectly, leads to community and harmony with others. I love getting together with a large group of our extended family and having a good time. Birthday parties, cookouts, camping…all of it brings an occasion for having a good time. We all usually gather together for Easter. It’s something I often look forward to.

That’s something that won’t happen this year — between the churches being closed on the high feast along with the quarantine situation. Despite this disappointment, this hasn’t put a halt to the cooking going on under our own roof.

Recently, my mom and I made a fruit bake that I simply love. I believe I ended up eating the entire dish in a matter of a few short days. We’ve also been baking bread. And, personally, I’ve been cooking breakfast a lot more than usual.

At college, I don’t really have the schedule or resources for spending an hour making breakfast. Now, at home, I can enjoy cooking that’s a million times better than the average meal available on campus. Hasta la vista, cafeteria!

Exercise

I have an interesting relationship with exercise. Namely, it’s never consistent. I typically have no scheduled time allotted for this crucial element to physical health.

The truth is that there are times when I go to the recreational center on campus nearly every day a week to use the exercise equipment. And there are other times when a month has gone by and I’ve barely made it the gym once.

Of course, now the use of a public gym is impossible for the majority of people. Thankfully, there are still a few simple measures I have been able to take to let out some steam during the time my family and I have been enclosed in the house.

Though my exercise remains inconsistent, this atmosphere that the quarantine has brought with it has prompted me to act. I have done pushups. I have access to some weights. There have been several nights that I’ve done a series of reps. However, one of the best resources I have at my disposal here is an elliptical.

We used to have a treadmill and a punching bag in our garage, but those have since been sold. The elliptical, relatively new to our household, is a blessing. Many of the days I have been back, it has rained, inhibiting me from taking a stroll outdoors. The elliptical offers ample opportunity to burn off a couple hundred calories without taking a step out of the door.

Comical Commentaries

I watch a lot of movies — from recent releases to vintage classics to scarce films no one has ever heard of. Indeed, it is my opinion that I have watched too many films. Nevertheless, I come with a passion and critical eye to any movie I take the effort of watching. I’ve also been told I can be pretty nitpicky about films, which is more or less true.

But sometimes it’s fun to watch a movie that is so awful that anyone investing their time in it can see its faults and make light of them. My dad and I have enjoyed watching snippets and full episodes of a program that does just that; it makes fun of obscure and even a few well-known cinematic productions. It’s somewhat akin to the style of Mystery Science Theater 3000.

I think it’s important to turn criticism into something comical. A healthy amount of comedy, in our entertainment and in our personal lives, can be a wonderful source of happiness and friendship.

Thinking

Not enough people take the time and energy to think for themselves. This can mean a lot of things. But specifically, I’m thinking about the act of contemplation. How often amid our bustling lives to we take pause and ponder life’s questions, those big and small?

Stuck at home with my mind eating away at itslef, I have been taking chunks out of my day where I have been thinking in deep ways. Silence can prompt us to this level of thinking. I have thought about the consequences of the paths I have taken in life so far. I’ve thought about how I miss friends and how attached I am to my family. I formulated opinions and ideals just by reading and conversing and thinking.

Once I’ve been thinking, I need to put my thoughts into words. That usually means sitting down to a piece of paper or a computer screen and pouring out what’s on my mind.

I would say that even in the moments I try to unwind I may quickly find myself striving toward the climax of a personal poem or some similar literary exploration. These are just a few ways by which somebody can loosen up and dig deep into their roots, to remember their beginnings and their potentials.