Everyone I know is on some kind of diet. Keto, Forks over Knives, Vegetarian, Vegan, Mediterranean, Weight Watchers, the list goes on and on. I can’t keep track of who is doing what anymore.

So of course I need to weigh in, (pun intended) on my own dietary plan.

First a small disclaimer. I am not a nutrition expert, dietician or doctor. I am a conscious eater.

Each of you must do what is right for you. But with all the chaos and distress in the world today, I am promoting a sensible approach I think can be adapted for almost anyone.

My plan starts with being in tune with yourself in a healthy emotional way. In fact, being emotionally healthy is the basis for surviving almost anything. If you aren’t at least somewhat emotionally balanced, first attend to that need.

1. Ask Your Body What It Wants

Just a conversation between you and your body. What am I really hungry for? In my experience, when I am craving something and try to deny, ignore or substitute something else, the craving will not go away. My consumption takes over and I cram in a larger number of calories than if I would have just fed the craving in the beginning.

I am better off in the long run just giving in to the craving in a responsible way. That means if I am craving chocolate, I will eat a couple of Dove Dark Chocolates and savor them slowly. I’ll even go so far as sitting down with an entire Hershey bar.

Not a half dozen candy bars. One.

2. Moderation

Julia Child was an advocate for eating and drinking anything you wish as long as it is in moderation. She lived a long full life surrounded by food and wine. I’ve always liked her style.

But what is moderation?

As I suggested above, moderation is one candy bar. Feeding a chocolate craving with a half dozen Hershey bars doesn’t make me feel better either physically or emotionally. Actually, I would not only pay a physical price of intestinal misery, but an emotional self-flagellation as well.

Not worth it.

3. Enjoy Mealtime

One of the tenants of the Mediterranean diet is to eat slowly and deliberately. Food is not just a means to fuel your body in my estimation. It is a celebration and can be so at each and every meal. Take time to truly taste each flavor. Chew slowly and deliberately.

Focus on the meal and your dining partner(s). Try not to read or watch TV or do anything other than simply engage in interesting conversation or if eating alone, do so in a meditative way.

Eat with gratitude. For the food and for life, as simple or complex as it may be.

4. Make a Special Food From Your Childhood

Often these special childhood foods are in the “comfort food” category. Something that brings back memories of a time, place or people that soothe our soul. In my family, I remember ham and beans cooked over an open fire for family reunions. Filling, inexpensive and comforting.

At the same time, these comfort foods connect you to your cultural heritage. Choose a dish that expresses your particular culture. Embrace and celebrate you and who you are.

5. Eat Communally Whenever Possible

Sharing meals is a time honored tradition. It is something we were created to do, from the very beginning. Genesis says it is not good for man to be alone. Whether you ascribe to the Biblical tradition or not, the principle is true. Humans were built for community. We crave it and sharing a meal is a great place to start.

In these days of social distancing, you may need to find a creative way to do this. If every member of your household has experienced the same exposure and risk, by all means, eat together and share your day. If you have to remain isolated, this may be a good time to set up a video chat or phone call. (Setting aside the advice in Rule #3.)

As I draft these rules for meals — 5 Rules to Eat By, I find that each of those can be incorporated in most of the popular diets. In fact some of these principles, with the exception of the one about feeding cravings is part of many diet plans.

Enjoy food.

Be grateful.

Use the rule of moderation.

Be present.

Julia Miller blogs at fivefelinefarm.com about thriving on a small farm. She spends a lot of time cooking, eating and thinking about food. You can follow all of the exploits at Five Feline Farm by joining the email list.