Grief is a funny little guy. In my case, a funny little furry grey guy.

How we will eternally remember him. Toto.

Honestly, I don’t think I knew what grief was till last year, when Toto died in my arms in the most melodramatic way possible. Poetic, one might call it… that he went like that. With just me and him alone at home. Sanjeev was speeding his way back to Chennai at that very moment, after I’d told him that Toto wasn’t keeping too well. Little did we know or even think that he’d just jump the gun like that, taking the decision of putting him down out of our hands. We had been losing sleep over it, tossing over the thought that we had to let this little guy go and make **the** call, worst possible thing ever; because there were a million ‘what ifs’ attached to it. Toto just said, here hold my beer, I’ll make this easier for you and went on his own terms. Like a boss.

I’ve written my essay about him. I could write a book, for all you know (it’s not something I haven’t considered, but that’s a discussion for another day). Today, right now, I want to write about this furry little thing called grief.

It hasn’t been too long since that awful night, but it has given me many hours of reading up on how to “cope” with grief. There may be a few of you who think this is hysterical.. grief, over a dog? Oh my, how funny, right? Yeah, stop reading right here, because I doubt you’d cry even if your kid died, so let’s just avoid possible conflict and go our own ways.

For the rest of you, who are nodding vigorously, perhaps because you understand that the loss of a loved one, is a loss of a loved one — be it human or not. And that was something one of my closest friends mentioned to me, having lost her own mother just a few weeks before I lost Toto. Not that it was rocket science, but it kind of made me understand that this was perhaps the first time I was really grieving the loss of a loved one, someone I loved and cared for, and fought with and sulked about. Grief over the loss of a real relationship, and that there was no right (or for that matter, wrong) way of expressing that grief. My husband had probably the sanest way of dealing with it, he made peace with Toto’s absence and took it to mean that he was now residing within him, forever. A place where he would talk to him, express himself and even share his eureka moments — from the most personal space in his head, where even I wasn’t allowed, perhaps. It was such a beautiful description, and as much as I understood it and craved it, I am, probably, yet to reach that stage.

The problem, however, was that I was trying to ape that emotion, and I failed terribly. Every morning was a reminder that Toto wasn’t there, I found myself breaking down and running off to the bathroom, because I didn’t want anyone, including myself, to acknowledge that this was affecting me as much as it did.

And then, as expected, Toto.. made me realise that it’s ok to be afraid of that feeling of loss, of doubt, of being scared itself.. through memories of little incidents, that I never really thought back to until the last few days. That there was no right way or right time for me to grieve or to stop grieving, and that this pang will probably continue for as long as I know, that it may dull down or I may just embrace it as a reminder of Toto, and perhaps savour it someday. I cannot put down in words as to how he showed this to me, but it was him.

So, as of today, I’ve decided to stop waiting for that day where I’m going to feel better, but just accept this emotion as a part of who I am, and cry when I have to and feel sad that he’s not around, laugh lustily at some silly incident around him or just sniff his old pillow and feel nostalgic, and that nobody can take all of this, all of him, away from me — not those precious moments spent with him, or those spent without. My biggest takeaway is exactly this — that his absence has meant as much, if not, even more, than his presence, and I will not shy away from ‘celebrating’ it, in my own way. Because… like love, grief is also personal. To quote some very wise person off the internet, “It is all the love you want to give, but cannot. All that unspent love gathers up in the corners of your eyes, the lump in your throat, and in that hollow part of your chest. Grief is just love with no place to go.”