An open letter to Iowa Governor Reynolds on COVID-19

Respectfully, I disagree with the course of action taken by the governor of Iowa to combat the novel virus.

The current actions fail to reflect the lessons drawn from pandemic history, the number of high-risk Iowans, the evidence on presymptomatic transmission, flawed testing, and the incubation period. The lack of formal pronouncement will impact already-vulnerable Iowans most.

Lessons from History

In 1918, St Louis enacted strict measures within 2 days of the first case.

Philidelphia waited 17 days, and the delayed distancing measures were powerless to stop the exponential force of nature.

Iowa is already 26 days removed from the first recognized case. COVID-19 is more than twice as contagious as the seasonal flu and spreading in a 100% susceptible population.

Elevated Risks

High-risk Iowans include 525,000 older adults and 1,800,000 with chronic disease. Over 700,000 residents have two or more chronic diseases. Both of these factors increase the risk of serious illness and death.

Iowa maintains 635 critical care beds that serve its 3,100,000 people. The rate of severe disease with COVID-19 hovers around 18% meaning that Iowa could exceed critical care capacity in 1–2 weeks. See Iowa COVID-19 timeline.

COVID-19 patients can require lengthy hospital stays, but the rate of infection means new sick people appear before beds open again. Then doctors must make choices no person should ever have to make.

Presymptomatic spread, incubation, & testing

The long incubation period means cases we find today were infected a week ago. There are likely many more cases in Iowa than currently recognized.

The virus spreads before people know they are sick, so asking people to self-isolate when they feel unwell won’t stop the virus. Issues with testing scarcity can give the appearance of low case counts.

If I have a room full of pregnant women and only one pregnancy test, my report could truthfully report only one positive pregnancy test. The testing only tells us about the people tested. Tests tell us nothing about where the virus is not. Even so, considering only confirmed cases portrays exponential growth.

Iowa COVID-19 Cases

Johns Hopkins University CSSE data for the state of Iowa

Cases in Wuhan, China climbed for over a week after implementing strict measures. The longer we wait, the more Iowans we risk losing.

I fear even if we act today, the cases may continue to climb long enough to exceed capacity. It happens in a flash. Less than two months ago we had no confirmed COVID-19 cases. Now, the US has 300,000.