As a cat lover, when I first began fostering cats I was wary about the fact I’d end up wanting to keep all the felines that came into my care. I find myself forming bonds with animals much easier than people and I was worried that saying “goodbye” to them when they were adopted would be too much for me.

Looking back, I remember trying to imagine what it would be like to say goodbye to Laser and McLaren and scaring myself into thinking there was no way I could do it. In reality, this was probably the wrong way to look at it. Laser and McLaren came into my life to join my family. Fosters are coming into my life for the sole aim of getting adopted — there is never a point when they come into my house that I think they’re joining the family permanently.

Monty — was very nervous when he came into care but loved to be fussed when he came out of his shell

I think this is how I manage to separate my feelings and allow myself to hand over cats I’ve grown to love and care for to other people when their time comes. Over the time I’ve been fostering, I’ve learned to deal with it better and I’ve found ways that help me deal with the little space that’s left when a cat is adopted from my care.

The aim of fostering cats is to bring them out of their shells, get them ready to go into a family home and become a loved and loving pet. All sorts of cats come through the door, each with their own special personality and their own ways that they cope with arriving into care. Some of them are confident and friendly, but in most cases, the cats hide and it takes them time to come to terms with the new surroundings and to come out of their shell (and out from under the sofa bed!).

The foster room when it was first set up

When I started the process of becoming a fosterer, I was visited by an existing fosterer and the area coordinator who gave me a general run through of what was expected. I went through some online training, which was mostly generic standards of care set by Cats Protection and expectations of how to handle adoptions. The area coordinator provided me with the basic bits and bobs to set up my foster room and ran through the paperwork with me and then I was set. I was a little surprised that there wasn’t more cat-based training, but in reality, they can’t really train you for that. You’re constantly learning and constantly evolving with how to look after the cats and what suits them best.

Lulu — my first foster cat

My first foster was a sweet female tabby called Lulu. She was quite timid, but eventually came around and was loving and friendly. She was in my care for around two weeks and although I didn’t really form a bond with her, I was worried about how I would feel when she left. Without the experience of re-homing a cat before, I wasn’t sure what to expect of adoption day and I did end up in tears after her new family took her away.

I’ve learned now, to have a goodbye chat with my cats before the new owners come. I tell them what is going to happen and tell them to be good for their new owners and that I’ve enjoyed having them to stay. And now, as they leave the house, I shut the door behind them immediately. Seeing Lulu looking back at me in her carrier and meowing in confusion as she was taken down the driveway was heartbreaking.

Nico — a very cheeky, adorable cat

A saying I’ve heard a lot within the cat fostering online community is “Goodbye is the Goal” and this rings true. You bring these cats into your life with the intention of saying “Goodbye” as soon as they’re ready and a home is found for them. I try to remember this when I start to fall for the cats and think “What if…” about introducing them to Laser and McLaren and the rest of the house.

I often wonder what the foster cats think when they spend a few weeks “trapped” in the one-bedroom only to find themselves carted away to another new home with another set of strangers. My biggest concern is that they think I have abandoned them or didn’t want them. I’m sure that they forget about me as soon as they realise their new owner is going to love them just as much, but I like to hope they have fond memories of the lady who looked after them until they found their purrfect home.