Being A Man Is Dangerous To Your Health

The data is pretty clear: dudes are more likely to die from the coronavirus

The coronavirus has marched across oceans and countries and streets and up nasal passageways and down throats and infected over a million people worldwide, killing almost sixty thousand. The virus knocks on our doors with a skeleton’s fist. I don’t answer. I like the illness where it is: outside. Away from me.

When it comes to this pandemic I am not fucking around. When I wash my hands I like to imagine tens of billions of viruses all screaming in pain, drowning in soap lather and hot water. Die, you little assholes, die! I am taking this plague seriously because I plan on dying of natural causes. My preferred natural cause of death is “quietly during a nap after a sandwich at 90 years old.”

I am constantly reading about COVID-19 because I have a lot of time to read articles that terrify me. COVID-19 is another more casual term for coronavirus, the highly-infectious respiratory illness that keeps me up at night. I like to switch it up, for the sake of variety.

Here’s what I know: older adults — those 60 or over — are in the highest risk group. I know that self-isolating and liming all human contact is as good a strategy as we have to prevent new infections. I know that scientists are working nonstop to try to understand this relatively new virus that our immune system is helpless against.

But I also know that COVID-19 is killing more men than women. There is ample data from China, Italy, and South Korea that clearly shows the virus is deadlier to men than women. In Italy, for instance, 8% of men died compared to 5% who were women.

In the U.S., the Centers for Disease Control are not keeping track of this data and I wish they would. But I’ll just add that wish to my personal pile of wishes, which also include a humble desire that the President’s know-it-all son-in-law not be put in charge of the health and well-being of tens of millions of Americans. But at least one of the White House’s top doctors, Dr. Deborah Birx, has confirmed that men are twice as likely as women to die from coronavirus.

The research is clear that men are more vulnerable to the coronavirus than women and no one knows why. But there are theories. One says that men are just unhealthier than women and therefore more susceptible to infection. In China, for instance, the majority of cigarette smokers are men.

Another says men just don’t take health warnings seriously. A recent Reuters/Ipsos poll found that 45% of men were “very concerned” about the pandemic versus 54% of women. In the same poll, one out of four men said that people were “unnecessarily panicking” over the coronavirus. These same men are also prone to blaming the media for freaking out the public.

Here’s a story from the media: The first recorded death from coronavirus in Miami, Florida was a 40-year-old man who got sick after attending a beach party.

There’s another theory. A simpler one. The immune systems of women are just stronger. Men may have more muscle mass but you can’t arm wrestle the coronavirus. We’re actually the weaker sex and it makes us crazy.