Photo Credit: clutchpoints.com

As every episode passes of “The Last Dance” documentary it becomes more and more apparent that we did not know as much as we thought we knew about the Chicago Bulls’ dynasty.

The moments that we thought we had in-depth information on, we are starting to realize that we barely scratched the surface. Here are my biggest takeaways from episodes 3 and 4 of the documentary series, “The Last Dance”.

Dennis Rodman Simply was not Human and did Way More than just Rebound

Many people view Dennis Rodman as a troublemaker who had the ability to grab an inordinate amount of rebounds. With this assumption of Rodman it can very well lead people to overlook his importance to the team.

Rodman was much more than a rebounder. In the ‘97-’98 season the Bulls were off to a slow start with Scottie Pippen sidelined due to injury. During this time Rodman stepped up immensely.

Rodman admitted during the documentary that sometimes his motivation and effort lacks. He had a tendency to go through the motions, and this would lead to indifferent play on the court.

Rodman’s game is predicated on high energy and hustle, when he doesn’t care most of his game becomes obsolete.

With Pippen being out, and the team getting off to a slow start, the Bulls could ill afford Rodman not bringing it every single night.

Dennis being Dennis, he decided to play by his own rules. In the documentary Jordan recalled a game in which Rodman was ejected. Jordan was livid with him because he felt as though Rodman left him out to dry, and now he had to figure out how to win this game on his own.

Jordan knew Rodman’s value to the team, and knew the burden that would come along after Rodman was ejected.

Rodman is a very unapologetic person, but in this particular instance he felt the need to display his remorse to Jordan. He ended up knocking on Jordan’s hotel room door and asking him for a spare cigar. Jordan knew that a gesture like this meant a lot coming from Rodman.

“He didn’t say an apology. He didn’t say anything,” Jordan said in the documentary. “But by him coming to my room, it was his way of saying, ‘Look, man. I f**ked up.’ And from that point on, Dennis was straight as an arrow. And we started to win.”

Rodman straightened up, brought back the energy and was a guiding force behind the Bulls’ turnaround.

The Bulls ended up winning 9 of their next 11 games, and Phil Jackson had this to say about Rodman, “Dennis is the one who held us together while Scottie was out.”

When Pippen did return Rodman’s role became a bit more reduced, and this didn’t sit well with Rodman. He had embellished his enhanced role and was saddened that things had to change.

Rodman being as unique a character as can be he claimed that he needed a vacation of 48 hours to rejuvenate. Where did Rodman decide to vacation?? Well of course Las Vegas, he wouldn’t be Dennis Rodman if he didn’t choose the most extravagant vacation spot.

The head coach Jackson gave his okay, and Jordan reluctantly gave his blessings as well. Of course Rodman wasn’t able to come through on his promise of 48 hours. Jordan took it upon himself to go to Rodman’s Las Vegas hotel room and drag him out of bed and get him to practice.

At that practice the team had to do a drill involving a lot of sprinting. Jordan assumed that Rodman would be lagging behind a bit, and he informed the team to take it easy on their rebounding star.

Rodman then goes ahead and takes a 4 lap lead before Jordan and his teammates could catch up. Jordan mentioned in the documentary that no matter what Rodman did, he was always on point.

Imagine taking a vacation mid season to Las Vegas, partying nonstop while there, and out running prime athletes that did everything in their power to stay in shape.

Madness. But that was Dennis Rodman.

Having a reputation of carefree ne’er-do-well, people start to assume that you don’t take your game seriously and that you don’t work hard. This was far from the truth for Rodman.

In the documentary both Rodman and Jordan attest to the amount of tireless hours Rodman dedicated to film. He would study players tendencies, and the likely angles in which the ball would carom based on the players both on his team and on the opposing team. He even focused on specific ways to tip the ball to himself.

Rodman talked about how he asked a friend of his to shoot until all hours of the night so that he would notice the spin and angles of certain shots.

Phil Taylor from vault.si.com wrote about The Worm’s studious ways, “Rodman is the only Bull studying the tape of Chicago’s game against the Atlanta Hawks the previous night. “Anytime I see Scottie or Michael shoot from the top of the key, I know the ball will come off the rim to the right,” he says, referring to teammates Scottie Pippen and Michael Jordan.”

Later on in that same article, Taylor talked about those rebound predictions, “Both times the ball bounces off to the right, and both times Rodman — who has spent hours observing the arc of their shots — is in position for an uncontested rebound.”

Rodman certainly had a motor like no one else, but his hours put in off the court is truly what made him great. Rodman broke rebounding down to a science. What’s even more remarkable is his ability to have unlimited stamina on the basketball court, while maintaining a rabid nightlife.

The things that Rodman’s body could endure without him losing that needed energy is what made him inhumane.

In the ESPN 30 for 30 documentary centered around Rodman’s life called, “Rodman: For Better or Worse”, it depicted his insane nightlife routine. Rodman would regularly stay out and drink till 5 or 6 A.M., be on time to practice, and still grab his 15 rebounds in the game. He then would workout rigorously after the game and start that process all over again.

Former NBA Star Kendall Gill recalled an interesting anecdote pertaining to Rodman’s inhumane behavior. On the Bulls Talk Pod, Gill reminisced about a time in which he and Rodman went out the night before a game between the Nets and Bulls. Gill had left the establishment around 12:30 A.M., he admitted (like most would) that that was a pretty late time for him.

He then asks someone to be mindful of when Rodman leaves. He calls that person the next day and asks when Rodman left, they say that Rodman left around 5 A.M.

Gill, figuring that he and his team had an advantage this night goes and tells his teammates the good news that Rodman wouldn’t be able to keep up with them this game. Rodman then proceeds to grab 20 rebounds and appears to have a full bill of health the entire game.

Dennis Rodman without a shadow of a doubt is the only person on the face of the planet that could pull this off. Can’t imagine any player partying and drinking until 6 A.M. with regularity, and STILL having the most energy on the court. It would be pretty tough to imagine Rodman thriving in this social media driven era of basketball.

Dennis Rodman is the epitome of an anomaly in every sense of the word. With the Chicago Bulls he never let that affect his performance on the court.

Doug Collins was a Big reason for Jordan’s Individual Success

I’m sure that there are a handful of people out there that may not know the head coach that coached Jordan before Phil Jackson. A ton of Jordan’s success is associated with Jackson and for good reason.

That coach before Jackson was named Doug Collins. Jordan loved playing for Collins. Collins had a style that catered to Jordan’s uncanny scoring ability.

Some might assume that an offense that catered to Jordan’s needs preached individualism, and not team basketball. His coaching style coincided with the idea that His Airness was a selfish player early on in his career.

“I coached him for three years. From the ’86-’87 season through ’88-’89. When I was coaching him, he was the MVP of the league, he was the MVP of the All-Star game, he won the slam dunk competition and he was the Defensive Player of the Year. That’s greatness,” Doug Collins said in Episode 3 of “The Last Dance.”

It was greatness indeed, but all these individual accolades don’t mean anything without that coveted team prize. That championship trophy.

I understand that with a talent as great as Jordan, you need to take full advantage of what he can do. This has been a tactic time and time again to be proven that cannot and will not win championships.

Jordan didn’t have many complaints about the way Collins coached. He was getting the shots he wanted, and Collins’ competitive nature really resonated with him.

Jordan hit an infamous shot over Craig Ehlo in game 5 in the 1st round of the Eastern Conference playoffs in 1989. According to the documentary when asked what play Collins drew up for that last possession, his answer was, “Get the ball to Michael, everybody get the f — k out of the way.”

Safe to say that Micheal Jordan and Doug Collins had a pretty tightly knit relationship.

Collins’ reign as coach seems to get swept under the rug often, but this point in Jordan’s career was pivotal. It was pivotal for Jordan because he gave Jordan the opportunity to revel in his individual greatness.

Everything that came with his individual greatness made Jordan thirst that much more for a championship, and helped him realize that no amount of individual success will ever equate to a championship.

Jordan mentioned in “The Last Dance” that the narrative of him being a selfish player that had the inability to win a championship really ate at him. He despised that notion.

Throughout the documentary he constantly talked about being mentioned among the greats of his time like Larry Bird and Magic Johnson.

That individualistic offense that Collins preached brought out a burning passion for the level of success that Jordan needed.

The Most Overlooked Man in the Success of the Bulls Dynasty

Photo Credit: newsweek.com

If you ask the average Joe who Tex Winter is you might get a blank stare. If you ask people who created the Triangle Offense the name that immediately comes to mind is Phil Jackson.

Tex Winter was the assistant coach of the Bulls from 1985–1999, and he doesn’t get nearly enough credit for what he did for the Bulls. Especially when you consider how he was once treated.

Winter brought up the idea of the Triangle Offense several times to Collins but to no avail. Collins was so frustrated with Winter’s triangle scheme so much so that Winter had to sit all the way at the end of the bench during games. He was even delegated to just taking notes during Bulls’ practices.

When Krause found out about the reduced role of Winter he didn’t like it at all, this may have been the biggest reason why Collins was replaced by Jackson as the head coach.

The overlooked mastermind behind the ingenious scheme of the Triangle Offense was none other than Tex Winter. The Triangle Offense as many of you know, would go on to help bring Jordan’s game to the next level.

This was the same offense that helped bring the Bulls their championships, and when Winter followed Jackson to the Los Angeles Lakers, the championships followed.

I’m a firm believer in believing that Jordan would have found a way to win championships regardless of what offense he had, but having the Triangle Offense one can’t deny how much easier it made things for Jordan.

The Triangle Offense added a fluidity to the Bulls in which we hadn’t seen before up until this point.

Krause loved Winter, so much in fact that he was willingly open in boycotting the Basketball Hall of Fame because they didn’t induct Winter in an orderly fashion.

In an ESPN.com article written by Bruce Levine, he talked about Krause being absent from Micheal Jordan’s Hall of Fame induction ceremony.

Krause said this regarding his boycott status, “But the Hall of Fame thing is personal with me. I’m not walking back in there until Tex Winter is acknowledged.”

The question then becomes if Krause loved Winter so much, why wasn’t he offered the head coaching job?

Winter was in the Bulls organization before Jackson and stayed a year after Jackson’s departure, and yet still wasn’t even considered for that head coaching position.

I think this simply comes down to some people are better suited to be head coaches and others are better suited to be assistant coaches. I’m sure that Jackson had some intangibles that people within the organization could not ignore.

Jackson likely had some leadership qualities, and the ability to effectively communicate with a wide range of people that made him more suitable for the head coaching position.

Winter was inducted into the basketball Hall of Fame in 2011, and should be synonymous with the Bulls’ dynasty success.

Michael Jordan did not like the Triangle at First but it was one of the Best Things to Happen to Him

Jordan hated the Triangle at 1st because in his eyes that just meant more shots for players not of his caliber. The Triangle Offense incorporated more ball movement and gave players more creativity in what they could do on the offensive end.

Jordan had a close relationship with Collins. In the documentary he didn’t seem heartbroken that Collins wasn’t his coach anymore, but he certainly didn’t see the need to get rid of him at that point. The Bulls had just gone to the Eastern Conference Finals in Collins’ last season.

When the coaches would tell Jordan that there is no I in team, Jordan would respond with, “But there’s an I in win.” This sort of mentality doesn’t bode well for Jordan and his teammates in this new system.

This new system forced Jordan to trust his teammates more. Something that wasn’t emphasized in the past.

It’s funny how Jordan was worried about the ball being in his hands less, when even still under the Triangle Offense he still managed to win 7 scoring titles in 8 years.

Not only did the system help Jordan but it added an immense level of comfort for Pippen.

Pippen mentioned in the documentary that he grew up a point guard and due to his growth spurt that he was forced into the Small Forward position. That great passing ability was already in his blood, and now he had the chance to display his whole skillset.

In Jackson’s 1st year as head coach with his newly implemented system, Pippen was able to make his 1st All-Star team.

The triangle led to more camaraderie and chemistry between teammates. These are the intangibles that lead to championships.

The Triangle Offense was something that Jordan wanted nothing to do with at 1st, but grew to be invaluable to Jordan’s and the team’s success.

How Classless was the Pistons Walking off the Court?

Photo cred: cbssports.com

In the 1991 Eastern Conference Finals the back to back NBA Champions the Detroit Pistons were eliminated by the Chicago Bulls in 4 games. Normally the losing team as an act of sportsmanship stays around until after the final buzzer and shakes their opponents hand. The Pistons had other ideas.

The legendary point guard and captain of the Pistons Isiah Thomas said in the documentary that Bill Lambeer brought up the idea that the team should walk off. That’s exactly what they did, the Pistons decided to walk off the court without acknowledging or embracing the Bulls in any way.

Thomas claims that they were just doing what the Celtics did to them years prior. Thomas also mentioned in the documentary that no one on his team had any bad blood with the Celtics, and everyone simply moved on for that situation.

With the Bad Boy Pistons reputation of being a bully, many viewed the fact that they walked off as displaying that they could dish the punishment but couldn’t take it.

Thomas mentioned during “The Last Dance” that knowing what he knows now that he wouldn’t have walked off on the Bulls.

Jordan didn’t care for Thomas’ comments on the ordeal as he believed that Thomas was only changing his answer to appease the fans of today’s NBA. MJ believes that Thomas has had an ample amount of time to think about the consequences, and whatever he has to say on the matter now does not truly reflect on how he felt years ago.

Jordan pointed out the fact that the Pistons had beaten the Bulls in the Eastern Conference Finals in consecutive seasons, and yet he still found a way to put aside any differences and shake the hands of his opponents. He mentioned how much losing to them hurt, but he still found a way to wish them luck in the Finals.

The Bad Boy Pistons walking off the court truly symbolizes what the Pistons were all about, and that gesture properly represents what the era was about. There were many moments throughout the 80s and 90s in the NBA where it seemed like sportsmanship was an afterthought.

No matter how grueling and physical the game was the players always had respect for each other off the court. With Jordan shaking the hands of the Pistons in back to back playoff series after devastating losses, one might assume that it is only common courtesy to return the favor.

Call the Pistons sore losers if you want, I chalked the moment up to that’s just how things were back then.

The Pistons created a memory that will forever last in the hearts of their fans. The city connected with the team, and their unapologetic approach resonated with the city greatly. I’m sure the fans of Detroit wouldn’t have had that game end any other way.

The Bad Boy Pistons wouldn’t be the Bad Boy Pistons without that sort of exit. The Pistons showed respect to the Bulls the only way that they knew how… disrespectfully.

It almost meant more to the Bulls and their fans knowing that the team that they struggled to get past for years couldn’t even stomach hearing that final buzzer. Representing a passing of the torch as there were new kings of the east.

One thing that this documentary series is very good at is that they have you begging for more and more after each week. Week after week we are left with an empty pit in our stomachs knowing that we have to wait a full seven days to get another episode.

If you are missing out on this documentary you are truly doing yourself a disservice.