Calling All Dads — How to be Your Kid’s Hero

Baby steps that lead to a large footprint in your kid’s life

My wife (center) as a kid wishing the muscle car was a Porsche.

Not long ago, I was having dinner with a few of the guys, when one of them admittedly said something I would never forget.

“I don’t like my kids.”

There were zero hints of humor or sarcasm in his voice. Nothing. He was dead serious. Now after some digging and a coffee date later, I realized one thing–he just didn’t know how to be a dad. Like many parents, he complained about the car ride interruptions, the unruly naps, playing “Where’s Waldo?” with the sippy cup, and the spaghetti on everything but his kid’s spoon. Each morning he was on his way to breaking the world record for the most repeated reheats of a single cup of coffee. Hit home yet? It certainly does with me.

The reality is, being a parent is probably one of the top three most difficult things in life. And unfortunately, it wasn’t until after I became a dad that I realized I was more married to the idea of being a dad than actually becoming a dad. I had only images of playing catch with my kids, going on slurpee runs, and throwing them in the air for the cheesy obligatory wear the same white shirt and jeans by the beach photo-op. No one told me that kids were actually work.

Until my kids told me.

So dads. Here’s the truth–your kid needs you. Not just your attention, but your affections. Not just your presence, but your involvement. Because here’s the thing. You too were once a kid. You too looked up to a figure with a cape. And the truth is, if you’re not the one wearing it, your kid will eventually find someone or something that will. With that in mind, here are three things I’ve learned that have helped me to rise from a mediocre dad to a less mediocre one:

Enjoy the Process More Than the Product

Have you ever tried finishing a puzzle with a three year old? Exactly. It’s impossible. So don’t. As men, we’re enamored with seeing finished products at the expense of enjoying the process. Your kids don’t care for a Picasso, they care for the paint brush that’ll turn every combination of yellow and blue to a murky black, and straight onto your thick skull.

Your kids will never remember what you finished. They’ll remember all of the in-between moments. The car ride after the game, the spontaneous dance party to Baby Shark, and the valiant attempts of making the most epic fort despite mama bear declaring a state of emergency in the living room.

Drop the expectation of finishing anything with your kid, and just enjoy the process of being with them.

Prize Consistency Over Perfection

One of the most daunting tasks of a father is how to begin life in the trenches. Take my wife for example. At 6:30 am she already has her workout done, finished a book that smells like rich mahogany, drank her coffee, and has an adventure planned at every hour as soon as the little boogers wake up. Mind you, she’s also pregnant with our third child.

I can’t compete with that. Nor should you.

The answer? Just include them in the mundane of your daily routines. When you make coffee, have them grind the beans. If it’s laundry, plop them on top of the dryer and let them fiddle with the dials while you load the washer. The point is that your kid isn’t looking for a super dad, they’re just looking for someone to show up. Your kid gauges effort, not extravagance. This removes the guilt that a super dad is one who has to plan a play date each week, buy a new toy every month, and spend an hour at bedtime recreating a scene from Frozen. Batman is good at what he does because he always shows up to battle, not because he wins every single one of them. Learn to be a pro at interrupting your kid’s world as much as they interrupt yours, and you’ll be golden.

Be Good At One Thing

Post dinner, I’m the one who throws the pillows off the couch and rocks out to the greatest 80s track known to man, outshined regularly by a 3-year-old drummer and a 1-year-old guitarist. My kids absolutely go nuts, and our ensemble usually lasts about two to three songs depending upon my willingness to build up a sweat. And that’s it. But that one thing is enough for my kids to remember that their dad loves them today. And you can do the same. Think about how you’re wired, and use those personality preferences to make a mark on your kid’s day. Problem-solver? Commit to one puzzle. Athletic dad? Penalty kicks with a plush soccer ball, best of three. Gamer? Mario Kart on 50cc. Just hone in on something you already are bent towards and own it with your kids. You might be surprised to find that the fruit doesn’t fall far from the tree.

Being a dad is one of the most rewarding experiences on this side of heaven, but you have to work at it. It’ll always be a process, require a daily commitment, and bring the greatest joy when your kid can say, “that’s my dad!” even if it’s just for one stupid thing. So dads, today, stop resting on the mantel of being a dad and instead become a dad by putting on the only cape you have. Now let’s get to work.