Photo by Katja-Anna Krug

Sitting has always been a part of life for us humans, since the very beginning, but our trends within the sedentary lifestyle has reached a new high where many of us may be asking, “Is sitting bad?”

The short answer is no.

The long answer is that the way we sit is bad, in fact, it’s hurting us. Mother nature has a sense of humor that many don’t understand, and the fact remains that many people in the western world suffer from chronic ailments and illnesses such as obesity, diabetes, mental health issues, cardiovascular disease, and cancer, etc. as a result of a sedentary lifestyle. It’s heartbreaking to witness strangers, friends, family members, and even myself go through this in different variations because one of the answers to our problems has been staring right in our faces this whole time.

We sit wrong. Sitting isn’t bad. Chairs are. In general, furniture has shaped our society’s standards of living, and we are sicker as a result.

Did you know that chairs are a recent phenomenon? I mean, think about it: our earliest ancestors, the Ardipithecus kadabba, lived around 5.5 million years ago. They didn’t have any furniture, let alone many tools with them. The concept of chairs began nearly 5,000 years ago, in 2800–2700 B.C. when a sculpture of a harpist sitting on a chair emerged from the Cycladic islands. The ancient Greeks depicted them in their stones, and in ancient Egypt, sitting was a matter of class status. Only the wealthy could have them because of the cost of materials. Nearly everyone sat, ate, and slept on the floor or on chests, benches, and stools. The same was still true in the 16th Century, so chairs weren’t widespread until as early as 500 years ago. Those people were all the better because they didn’t have the luxury of chair arms and a back part.

There are cultures today that make sitting on the floor the norm, primarily South and East Asia (India, Japan, South Korea). This just proves that chairs are overrated, and we can stand to learn a few things from them. Starting with 7 reasons why floor living has led to healthier bodies.

1. They have more strength in their torso.

Correct posture requires a strong core and shoulders. Many of those who hunch over on a daily basis tend to have complaints of pain in their lower back. Plus, those people are taller. They appear thinner and more confident. It’s sad that sedentary habits have come to this, but at least improvement’s always sexy!

Side note: If you sit on the floor, turns out your pelvis plays a great deal in posture and comfort. Say you sit with your legs crossed — In addition to sitting up straight, it’s important to also lean forward slightly with your butt slightly out. Leaning forward reduces the pressure on the base of your spine and shifts the weight to a different area where it should naturally be more comfortable. This may feel weird at first, so I encourage you to do what you can to be as comfortable as possible, such as getting pillows or yoga blocks to aid your butt and knees.

Photo by Nicholas Elorreaga. He has a great article on the breakdown of these positions!

2. They have more mobility.

Standing desks are great for moving around more, but it’s just not as practical for many people. (Just like there are those who may not think sitting on the floor is practical despite having read this!) The choice is yours, whether you sit, stand, stretch, do a combination of all — just make sure you’re moving more throughout the day. Contrary to what school teachers may say, fidgeting is good for you! Shifting into new positions every so often allows for a fuller range of motion and flexibility (which I’ll get to next). By moving around more, the blood circulation increases. When sitting in a chair, the blood will flow down to legs and feet easily, but will have a harder time coming back up to the arms and the heart. So, if you’re starting to get that tingly and numb feeling in any part of your body, it’s time to move.

3. They’re more flexible.

By sitting on the floor, their hips and knees are more open. Their muscles and joints don’t ache as much because they’re consistently being used to their fullest extent. People tend to sit in chairs the same way all day long, and it’s equally bad if people sit on the floor in the same one position all day long. The same issues of flexibility would arise. I can’t stress how important it is to vary the positions you sit in throughout the day. These positions can range from squatting, to crisscross-applesauce, to a staff (legs straight in front of you) pose.

4. They may be more spiritually aligned with themselves.

They’re more likely to meditate. Sitting on the floor, aside from laying, is gravity at its finest, and they feel more grounded. Those who are grounded are more confident, have an unwavering sense of calm, reliable, and humble. Yet they also march to the beat of their own drum. These are symptoms of a great leader.

Having less furniture around also frees up the physical space. It’s much easier to do a wider variety of activities with less conflicting pieces around. This also leads to mental freedom because of the lack of stuff! With freedom, a better flow of ideas and clear decisions arise. The room(s’) your oyster!

Photo by Manuel Cosentino

5. They eat better.

Now, this is both a direct and an indirect outcome.

The direct part is that eating on the floor leads to better digestion. Better digestion is a result of the constant back-and-forth movement is takes between scooping our next bite and eating it which increases the secretion of our stomach acid.

Indirectly, sitting on the floor also allows people to be more mindful of what they’re eating and how much they’re eating, provided that is the only thing they’re focused on. Our bodies are always sending us signals for when we’re hungry and/or thirsty and when we’re full. Of course, the floor does not automatically mean that you’ll stop eating processed and fried foods, but through mindfulness you may start to notice how your body feels after eating. Part of the initial stages of mindfulness is learning to recognize all the signals your body has been giving you all this time.

6. They’re more environmentally friendly

The rule is: if something must be manufactured, usually through a means that contribute to the destruction of our planet, most likely it’s not needed. There are few exceptions. Chairs, frankly many pieces of furniture, are not part of them. As of 2017, 12.2 million tons of furniture wind up in American landfills annually. Americans produce more than 30% of the planet’s total waste even though they represent only 4% of the population. Mass production isn’t entirely the people’s fault, more the corporations’, but they do still share a part of the blame because of the natural demand. The materials most likely aren’t recyclable under the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s current standards, and they aren’t biodegradable.

Not to mention the toxins that furniture and many other items associated with. Flame Retardants supposedly keep us safe, but they mostly make us sick. They’re linked to cancers and organ failure. When a fire starts, flame retardants have been found to increase death due to the invisible gases (bromine increases carbon monoxide and hydrogen cyanide) that are present. When there’s never been a fire, these chemicals linger for long periods of time which then causes the cancer. They trickle into our water sources. Not only are the chemicals being breathed in, we’re drinking them!

7. Overall, people live longer

This is because people are stronger, more flexible, and have higher mobility. Eating well and moving lots are key to a healthy lifestyle. Elderly people who make sitting on the floor a part of their lifestyle is 21% more likely to get up by themselves after falling, thus having a higher mortality rate.

Photo by Jerry Wang

“Soooo….. Does this mean I have to quit chairs altogether?”

No, then I’d be a hypocrite. Absolutely not. Sitting is a very personal experience to everyone.

For me, I’ve embraced it. In my space I’ve gotten rid of my chair and lowered my desk to coffee table height. I’ve also gotten rid of my queen-sized bed, and I sleep with all the pillows now, but that’s a different article. I love this new arrangement, but I’m still getting used to it. It’s been a gradual process for me, and I’ve already noticed how uncomfortable my lower back gets when I sporadically decide to sit on the couch.

To you, this might seem like quite a stretch. I get it. It’s a process, and everyone is different. I still encourage you to try it. You can start incorporating this habit by dedicating floor time to when you watch TV, when you eat, or have a weekly board game night. The important thing is, do what you can and what you’re comfortable with — listen to your body. Only you know what’s best for you in the moment.