When we visited the port cities, we found restaurants that matched our expectations. Catering to tourists, these eateries offered the Caribbean flavors we were craving. We indulged in spicy chicken, rum-drenched fruits, and zesty rice. I ordered a round of Gulf shrimp and was amazed to see that they were eight inches long, beer-battered with their heads still on. I acted out a brief scene from Romeo and Juliet with them before my classmates told me to stop.

We were pleasantly surprised to discover that pineapple (which the Q’eqchi Mayan descendants called “ch’op”), so bitter in the United States, was amazingly sweet and supple in Belize. And bananas — one of the nations’ chief exports — had a delightful flavor that put American grocery stores’ bananas to shame.

Coming back to the United States was hard. I missed the lush green jungles and vibrant flavors. Even the bland chicken served by our host families was better than the artificially plumped-up stuff that I bought at the store. I wished that I could travel more and discover more amazing foods.

Embracing Vegetables

A few years after the trip to Belize, I decided to become a vegetarian. After seeing — and tasting — the difference between farm-raised chickens and those raised in brutal factories, I wanted to minimize my contribution to those industries. I decided to keep (sustainably sourced) seafood as part of my diet to keep my protein up and take advantage of those magic omega-3s.

This dietary shift was when I truly became a foodie. With chicken, pork, and beef out of my diet, I was forced to rethink my meal planning. Who says that we have to eat a meat and two vegetable sides for dinner? Who decided that a balanced breakfast includes sausage and eggs? I started thinking about vegetables as a main dish, and it opened up a world of possibilities for me. I’d grown up with boiled corn, canned green beans, and mashed potatoes on the side. Now, I was discovering the joys of baked squash, fried polenta, roasted Brussels sprouts, and so much more.

My taste buds had evolved as well. The Great Spice Incident in Belize had triggered a morbid curiosity in the terrifying range of chili peppers. I learned what the Scoville scale was and started challenging myself to move up it. Meanwhile, I started buying spices such as cardamom, curry, and ginger to use in my cooking.

Throughout this journey, I started seeking out interesting foods rather than simply eating out of necessity. The concept of fast food began to baffle me. I no longer could understand how my friends could just swing through a drive-through to sate their hunger. For me, food had to be an experience.