Bulgarian Mid-Summer Market

Many of us here in New York and around the world are cooking a lot these days, especially those of us who have children. Preparing delicious food, serving it at the table and having family meals together are the highlights of our days during quarantine. If there is one thing that I appreciate about the strange times we live in, it is the opportunity to get to know my kids better and to engage with them in dinner conversations.

One of the first things I did when it became clear that we will be home for a while, was to get the new cookbook by Melissa Clark: Dinner in French. The first recipe I tried was the simple, easy and delicious “chicken with mushrooms”, which I loved so much, that I ended up making it for three weeks in a row. I then made the “lentils and sausage” recipe, which was also delightful and reminded me of the home cooked Bulgarian leshta.

One of the great things about French cooking is the emphasis on ingredients and simplicity. Sometimes all you need is a couple of really good vegetables, yummy olive oil and a little flaky salt … I should probably take a pause and make a correction here: our son is a vegetarian and has been one since the moment he realized what meat actually is. So, for him, we always have some extra veggies, tofu, beans or other plant-based proteins on hand and we always make extra effort to make sure he gets delicious food too.

I grew up around my two Bulgarian grandmothers who were both amazing cooks. I always marveled at how different their approach in the kitchen was. My grandmother Alexandra was a sophisticated cook: she fussed and worried, followed lots of rules and regulations, measured things precisely and didn’t let anyone near her when she was in the kitchen. As a result she was an exceptionally good pastry and desert maker. Recently I became fascinated with baking and have been trying to make deserts. I like to think that I inherited my love for making cakes from my grandma Alexandra. My most famous desert, which most of my close friend have tried is called “Plisetskaya”. It is just like the Pavlova desert, but made with chocolate and mascarpone cheese.

Double Chocolate Plisetskaya

My other grandma, Tsvetana, was from a village in Northern Bulgaria, where cooking, like folk music, is passed on from generation to generation. While she read a lot about food and healthy eating, she was not in the habit of following precise recipes and threw things together by feel. When I was little and we all lived together in her apartment, I would wake up every Sunday morning to the smell of freshly made mekitzi, palachinki or portmoneta. The last one was her own invention of fried dough (mekitza), filled with feta cheese. Many Bulgarian families enjoy delicious breakfasts on Sunday mornings, oftentimes featuring baked or fried pastries, crepes, jams, yogurts and fruits. Today we keep this tradition here in New York: as a family we love to wake up early on Sundays and enjoy making and eating a special breakfast together.

Sunday Bulgarian breakfast

Both my grandmothers made food that was seasonal. Like everyone in Bulgaria, they used whatever ingredients were available to them in the markets. In late summer they would make zimnina (winter food) — pickled vegetables, liutenitza, kompot and jam. I loved those late summer rituals, watching my grandmothers roast peppers in special roasting machines, unique to Bulgaria, then carefully peel and de-seed each pepper, run them through their meat grinders (every family had one and used it for a lot more than just meat), and then slowly cook the peppers in sunflower oil and spices until just the right color and consistency. They would then fill their winter jars, sterilize them in boiling water and arrange them neatly in the winter pantry or in the back of their kitchen cabinets.

The markets in Bulgaria were abundant in summer with the most delicious fruits and vegetables on earth. The produce was sold seasonally: berries in early spring, followed by peaches and apricots in the early summer months, followed by watermelons, grapes, apples and pears in late summer and autumn. In winter people relied on their preserved food supplies and, on occasion, exotic imports from far away lands: bananas, oranges and mandarins. The mandarins were often included in our Christmas gifts while the bananas were considered as rare and precious as chocolate.

I remember the first time my mom came to New York, she was amazed that one could buy watermelon, bananas, strawberries, cherries and grapes all at the same time.

Once she tasted the produce though, she was no longer so impressed.

When I moved to my first apartment in New York I asked my grandmother Alexandra to write down my favorite recipes in a book, so that I could make them when I felt homesick. As a new, inexperienced cook, I needed as much help as possible, therefore I asked her to avoid using vague language, such as “put as much flour as the dough would take”.

My grandma agreed and to this day I often refer to her well-worn, well-used recipe book, especially written for me. One of the recipes reads: “After one hour, carefully open the oven door. Take a spoon and prepare a small plate to rest the spoon on. With the spoon, carefully (it is going to be very hot) take some of the liquid from the pan and spread it over the meat. Rest the spoon on the previously prepared plate. If the meat looks burnt, take an old newspaper and cover it. Close the oven and turn down the heat a little bit. Wait another hour and check if it is done. Be careful that it is not raw.”