Lesson One: Existing vulnerabilities compound in times of crisis.

Despite being the richest country in the world, wealth does not translate to increased resilience in the United States - a country where 40% of adults cannot cover an unexpected $400 expense, where average life expectancy has declined for multiple years in a row, with some of the worst infant mortality rates among so-called “developed” countries (with rates twice as high for black infants compared to white), and where no meaningful progress on poverty reduction has been made since the 1970s. One-in-four adults in the United States rent rather than own their homes, and nearly half of those renters spend more than 30% of their income on rent every month.

These sort of conditions have effectively integrated wide swaths of people in the United States into spending patterns that depend upon and mirror the “just-in-time” nature of our economic systems of production - paycheck rolls in, bills get paid, not much leftover - “easy come, easy go”. This works out alright for most people until an unexpected crisis occurs. When the crisis is personal - a sudden illness or injury for example - the narrative is quickly advanced that the person in question should have been more responsible, should have saved more money, should have planned ahead. When a society-wide crisis hits - like a pandemic or an economic recession - it quickly becomes apparent that the personal responsibility narrative is based on a limited understanding of reality.

As Victor Tan Chen and Ofer Sharone recently lament about the current crisis in The Atlantic: “A just-in-time economy, it turns out, has no real margin for error”. What happens when American renters lose their jobs and the rent is still due? Or when they catch a virulent pandemic disease and have to turn to the most expensive health system in the world without their employer-provided health insurance? If we truly want to be resilient to future crises, we need to start with the latent crises of inequality and precarity that characterize so many American lives.

Lesson Two: Public crises require public solutions, not private ones.

If the resilience of people in a system depend upon the ability to access resources and the “entitlement of individuals and groups to call on these resources”, then we have to be intentional about providing access to resources before crisis hits. The crisis in the United States has unfolded against a decades-long erosion of public protection programs, and while the wealthy and powerful have been able to leverage their positions to insulate themselves from the damages of pandemic-induced economic downturn, less-privileged Americans have not.

Although an economic relief bill was passed in US congress on March 25th - already two months after the first reported case of COVID-19 in the United States - the first stimulus payouts only started being deposited in U.S. bank accounts over the weekend of April 11th, and only to taxpayers who had set up direct deposit for their 2018 or 2019 federal income tax filings. Those needing a paper check in the mail may need to wait much longer - up to 20 weeks by some reporting. Despite an historic 30 million people (or roughly one-in-six American workers) filing for unemployment, state unemployment systems suffering from decades of under-funding are unable to process these claims effectively, holding up a critical lifeline for people who have lost their jobs. Almost three-fourths of those who applied for unemployment in March did not receive their benefits that month.

Public programs have long been targeted for dismantling and privatization by American politicians and economists, from education, to healthcare, to transportation. The effect of these waves of privatization have been to increase inequality and disproportionately effect the poor, as well as to remove pathways by which phenomena of racial inequality in the United States may be reduced - an aim that is completely contrary to increasing public resilience to crisis. Bringing public resource under private control effectively reduces the ability and entitlement of individuals and groups to access resources - if we want to be resilient to future crises, we need to warm up to the protective role of public institutions and programs.

Lesson Three: Preparedness means planning and acting ahead, not just reacting quickly.

The focus of climate experts on the twin features of adaptation and mitigation combine two distinct vantage points of planning and problem-solving that reinforce each other. Mitigation is inherently reactive - if we did not build systems which produce such massive amounts of environmental damage in the first place then we wouldn’t have to mitigate those damaging effects. The fact that we are stuck with the damage now means that there is no option but to mitigate damages, and quickly. Mitigating these damages now helps them not compound into increased risk in the future, but requires effective management of systems.

Building the capacity to adapt is inherently forward-looking. We aren’t sure of the challenges that we’ll face in the future, but we can try and cover our bases by building the capacity to adapt across all levels of a system before crises occur. This capacity will help us weather crises without people dying, and without society fracturing, but takes some time to create and reinforce. Decisions to build this capacity must be taken and followed through upon well before crisis occurs if we want to be able to draw upon them in times of need.

Enabling adaptation and mitigation in publicly accessible ways that reduce the compounding risk of vulnerabilities requires a degree of foresight and management that the American system currently lacks. The free-market economic thinking that is so influential across United States government expresses explicit animosity towards management of systems, and the tendency to track the health of our socioeconomic systems with the rise and fall of the Dow Jones focuses our policy gaze away from the long-term and towards the quarterly business cycle. Dealing with future crises - both the expected crises of advancing climate pressures and the unexpected crises of pandemics, economic downturns, political instability, etc. - will require overcoming a deeply entrenched preference for laissez-faire, towards deliberate and careful management of socioeconomic systems with long-term sustainability goals in mind.