Fun fact: The wildly popular and addictive beverage, Coca Cola, was initially created as an alternative to morphine and is derived from the Coca leaf! It also once contained very small amounts of cocaine! The coca leaves currently used to make Coca Cola are “decocainized”!

Even with strict adherence to every precaution and recommendation, I was no match for Cusco’s high elevation. My battle with altitude sickness commenced almost immediately. As I exited the airport, I felt light on my feet and had a tingling sensation in my fingers and toes (also possibly a side effect of acetazolamide). Then there was the Airbnb rented by myself and my travel companions. It was draped with an almost never-ending flight of stairs. A feat that would take seconds at regular altitudes now rendered me a panting and breathless rendition of my former self. Resting every 8–10 steps was all but mandatory for fear of passing out. By the end of the night, nausea, body aches, and a headache to battle even my worst migraine, were undeniable realities that confirmed I was experiencing altitude sickness. I drank another cup of coca tea, took my evening dose of acetazolamide, some migraine medication, naproxen, and Zofran and called it a night! (Don’t judge me! What can I say? I’m a doctor and I don’t travel without a full pharmacy!)

By morning, due in part to a good night’s rest and my arsenal of medications, my altitude sickness resolved — and not a moment too soon! It was time to see Cusco in all its glory!

Read on to see how I spent my first day in Cusco, Peru!

It’s all smiles on the streets of Cusco! Take that altitude sickness!

Shopping in San Pedro Market

If you’ve been following me on Medium or any of my social media platforms, you know that visiting the market is by far one of my favorite things to do in a new country. Cusco was no different! There was so much to see! Fruits, vegetables, textiles, smoothies, nuts, dried fruits, and potatoes! Sooooo many potatoes! As the capital of the Inca Empire, Cusco played a significant role in the empire’s agriculture. The native people of Cusco are believed to have cultivated over 3,000 species of potatoes! Coca, in every form imaginable, was wildly abundant at the market! Coca leaves, coca candies, coca tea, coca chocolate — it was all there for the taking. Food stalls were also present where one could partake in many of the areas traditional Andean cuisines (Andean refers to the Andes mountain region). I purchased my beloved llama sweater from the market and it remains one of my favorite souvenirs from my time in Peru.