Addiction and depression run in my family.

Over the course of late adolescence and teendagedom, I had become the apple martini of my mother’s eye — or box of Franzia, in her case.

When my older sister left home for San Francisco, I was 16 and felt that I had lost my only friend at home, my familial reprieve. Myspace babbling and angled selfie-taking could only release so much, so I found other ways to cope.

My friends and I made new friends in Turkish Silvers and senior boys with hookups to house parties. We’d drink Keystone Lights and jungle juice through weekends of late night truth or dares and badly given blow jobs (sorry Jeff). The world hadn’t yet discovered the sparkling allure of Instagram #FOMO, but I used any late night texts to hang as an excuse to leave the house.

Curfews didn’t exist at home, but I suppose it’s difficult to parent when you’ve been passed out on the couch for three days. Though, I did binge-watch 38 episodes of Love Island a few weekends ago, so I get it now.

My family danced delicately around my mother’s addiction, mostly silent and stuffed away in cluttered cupboards filled with empty bottles of Yellow Tail.

After the first attempted intervention and messy aftermath, the slight forays into sobriety never lasted long. I never learned to formally communicate the toll it took on my own mental health — much less understand what my mother was going through, so I stopped trying.

She wasn’t a human in my eyes back then, she was Mom — the one supposed to have everything figured out. She was to have everything folded neatly in her laundry room of a brain, spin cycle on repeat, but ready to wear for the daily grind.

As I inch closer and closer to 30 (my mother’s age when she had my sister) — the comparisons build.

They ebb and flow; from wine at noon to outwardly (and sometimes poorly) keeping it all together. Accepting invites and stacking deadlines, saying yes for fear of letting others down, flailing in disguise of broken self-esteem.

Having learned people-pleasing tendencies from an early age, I’ve become numb and incapable of standing up for myself. Most of my life-altering decisions stem from other people’s opinions on what I should do, or what they would do.

Life hack: it’s easier to follow directions when you have no fucking idea what’s going on.

Adult children of alcoholics err on the side of perfectionism, which duh — doesn’t and never will exist. We tend to overly control the people in our lives and mirror our own sense of identity and well-being to the emotional goings-on of friends, partners, coworkers, etc.

Tensions with loved ones build then fall into a suffocating fog of complaints and feeling sorry for yourself — if only they would change this, then I would be able to focus on a better career path. If only they would open up more to me, then I would really have the time to flourish sexually. If only they would stop drinking less, then maybe I wouldn’t have to worry so much in social situations. If only they would understand that my silence is an armor instead of retreating further back into a safety cave of stonewalling.

Life hack: it’s easier to fix other people’s problems when you have no fucking idea how to process your own shit.

We tuck our personal traumas deep inside our purses, mingling with crumpled receipts and half-eaten granola bars as we navigate a meandering path toward #enlightenment. I made it to page 56 in Melody Beattie’s Codependent No More (my sister’s recommendation), but I haven’t mustered up the courage to scale the chapters yet.

It’s hard to heal and work through toxic patterns of ancestral trauma when rent is just around the corner and you’ve been on a waitlist for affordable therapy almost 7 months.