#1 Reduction in Admissions to Eating Disorder Programs

Since we have entered an era where the term social distancing has become a real thing, admissions to any treatment facility has been down. Why?

People who run the facilities want to protect their staff and current patients. What does that mean for people who need treatment?

It means they are shit-out-of-luck. Unless you are showing blood or bone, you are not getting admitted to any hospital for treatment.

Or that might only be here in New York state. For people with eating disorders, this means they may be cut off from services that help them cope.

Day programs are often a place of refuge for someone in recovery from an eating disorder. They can come to these programs and a way of coping.

With these facilities closed, many people who meet the diagnostic criteria for an eating disorder are left to their own devices.

Being left to one’s own devices amid COVID-19 might not be the best idea.

Hopefully, many of the people who are in recovery are getting services via telecounseling/telehealth/telemedicine.

And while having access to treatment services through technology is a privilege, we also have to recognize it has its limitations.

Some forms of treatment are irreplaceable.

#2 Stress is a Trigger for Anxiety and Maladaptive Behaviors

Stress can be a significant trigger for anxiety, especially in times of considerable uncertainty.

And that’s where we are right now — living in uncertain times, my friend.

Some people are saying capitalize on this downtime; others are saying build your dream business.

Well, some can’t do either because they are suffering in silence. Some people are so effing triggered by what’s going on in the world at the moment.

These people can’t do shiggidy but shut down — and shutting down for some means relapsing into old comforting behaviors that reek of a need for control.

Yes! The base behavior of many eating disorders is control.

COVID-19 came in and disrupted any sense of control a person may have had. Look at the chaos that took place at the supermarkets.

Based on the type of eating disorder, a person meets the diagnostic criteria for, this scene could have caused immense anxiety for them. How do I know?

I was one of the people who it caused anxiety. When I walked into the supermarket on Friday the 13th, I immediately wanted to binge eat.

I felt it inside, and I have not had a relapse for a long time. Not a severe relapse anyway, where my hands felt sweaty, and my mind was racing.

My issues with food run deep, I promise. To mitigate what I was feeling, I had to engage in my meditation and grounding exercises, which are self-care.

What did self-care look like for me? It looked like moderate exertion physical activity to stabilize my mood. It looked like wine and weed too.

Now, are these self-care techniques going to work for everyone? No. But, they are part of MY larger self-care action plan. Why?

I know that when I go to them, they will serve me in a way that binge eating won’t. These replacement behaviors help me mitigate a relapse.

What does a severe relapse look like for me? The last one I had, I ate about 13,000 plus calories a day. It got to the point where I felt out of control.

Now, I don’t count calories, but when I went into treatment for my binge eating disorder, it was part of what helped me quantify my disorder.

Counting my binge calories allowed me to gain some focus. It was also counting diet calories that gave me focus on my eating disorders as well.

Yes. That’s right. I was dealing with two eating disorders — binge eating disorder and chronic dieting.

After a severe binge episode, I would typically go on a diet of 1500 calories or less. That type of behavior was torture on my body.

It didn’t help that while I was in the midst of a binge episode, which sometimes lasted 4 to 6 months, I would never move my body.

Most of the time, I would lay in bed, watching television, and sleep.

When I was over my binge episode, and deep in the abyss of diet culture, I would work out three hours a day. Again, this behavior was not healthy.

Nothing about anything I was doing was healthy.

I was spending bill money and doing all kinds of nonsense to support my binge eating and dieting habits.

I can remember being so deep into a binge that I purged for the first time. Why did I purge? I had no more room to fit any more food.

I wasn’t purging to maintain control over my size. I was purging to make space for my continued binge. Those are some dark days to look back on, my friend.

Sometimes I can’t believe I was that deep into the throes of depression, anxiety, self-loathing, promiscuity, alcohol abuse, substance abuse, and food addiction.

My desire to control the binge and be able to eat for hours and days on end became my main focus. I loved it and lived for that stuff.

For me, food is the ultimate drug of choice. Nothing does it for me like food. My obsession with it goes back to early childhood, somewhere around age 8.

I haven’t had a significant bout of binge eating or dieting in over five years. But COVID-19 has definitely been a test of my behavior sobriety.

Why do I call it behavior sobriety? Because unlike many substances users, I can’t choose to abstain from my drug of choice.

I hear some of you saying, “W.T.F., is she talking about?”

I’ll explain. I believe food can be an abused substance, much like alcohol, cocaine, marijuana, meth, and many more substances.

The problem for people like me in recovery from an eating disorder is that we need food to live. Therefore, we have to deal with it at a minimum three times a day.

This, coupled with the constant onslaught of vitriol from diet culture and the diet cultist who represent it, can be a ton of shit to deal with daily.

I’m good at navigating these waters, but I also know that anything could happen. Any trauma could show up and change the situation.

So yes, stress can be a son-of-a-bitch. And social distancing is a significant source of anxiety and stress for many people.

There are a ton of people like myself who regularly practice social distancing as their usual way of life, so it doesn’t bother them.

Still, for others, this isolation can be a horrible experience.

#3 Routines have been disrupted.

Another reason eating disorders might be triggered by social distancing is that the practice has disrupted people’s routines.

For example, my routine has been severely disrupted. How? I like to get up and move my body for at least 10 minutes a day.

This typically looks like me taking a walk or grabbing a short stint on the elliptical at the gym. Due to the fact that everything is closed, I can’t do this.

Instead, I am relegated to my house. I am fully work-from-home, which can be tough. Yes, even though I’m a homebody, I still like to get fresh air.

Not to mention, I had just moved in with my significant other when the practice of social distancing began. Not good.

This is why I had to pivot and go back to some of my old diet culture devices, which can be triggering in-and-of-themselves.

What did I go back to? I purchased my Beachbody On Demand workout videos. These things have soooooo much diet culture language; it’s not even funny.

Nevertheless, I don’t mind doing some of the programs. There are about 7 or 8 of them that I can rock with, so I invested. I have to move to keep my mood.

I also got their Shakeology product. Not because I use it to lose weight or anything like that, but I do like being able to make something quick.

Plus, Shakeology helps with my energy. Why? I have no effing clue, but it does, and being in the house on end like this, I need that energy.

That energy will help keep my desire to want to go into an episode of deep depression at bay, which is a good thing.

I promise an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Coming up out of a depressive episode can take months, and I don’t have that to do.

If my routine has been disrupted and I’m a homebody anyway, I know other people’s habits have had the shiggidy disrupted out of them.

I can’t even imagine what some people are dealing with right now. Some fat people might be in confined quarters with non-supportive people.

Or with those they have conflict.