If tough love really worked for lasting weight loss, well, there’d be a lot more folks who’ve successfully lost weight and kept it off. It’s not as if nobody loses their excess weight, of course they do, but the reality for folks who struggle with significant obesity is sobering.

Some estimate that 80% of those who lose 10% or more of their body weight will regain it — and many of those folks will gain back even more weight than they lost.

If tough love worked for weight loss, I wouldn’t be staring down a future where I weigh 500 pounds.

I’ve been blogging about my life for more than two years, frequently covering personal struggles with my weight, lipedema, PCOS, and disordered eating. Honestly, I wish I could tell you that it gets easier. That writing about such personal issues becomes old hat after a while. I wish I could say that writing about my struggles has helped get to where I want to be with my body.

But it hasn’t.

The reality is that writing about my weight issues simply helps me cope. And in a small way, I think it helps others by giving them a little window into obesity too. It’s a human issue that all too often gets pushed aside by others who don’t have a clue.

After all, I’m old enough to remember when Liz Hurley made her crass comments about Marilyn Monroe’s body:

“I’ve always thought Marilyn Monroe looked fabulous, but I’d kill myself if I was that fat,” Hurley told Allure magazine in an amazingly tactless moment … “I went to see her clothes in the exhibition, and I wanted to take a tape measure and measure what her hips were. (laughter) She was very big.”

Such comments are terrible yet so very familiar for those of us who are also very fat. And it doesn’t exactly help when you discover that Marilyn’s famously plus-size body was a myth. In more recent years, we’ve had celebrities like Amy Schumer, who shamelessly made a name for herself as “a big girl,” yet objected to the suggestion that she was plus-sized. She went out of her way on social media to let everyone know she’s not a size 12 or 16, but a much smaller 6 to 8.

Like plenty of other fat shaming women, Schumer also went on record saying her main concern was the health of impressionable girls.

“Young girls seeing my body type thinking that is plus size? What are your thoughts? Mine are not cool Glamour not glamourous”

Honestly, at the time I found it hard to sympathize with Amy or even agree with her stance when so many of the responses to her post were to assure her that she’s not fat. If she were really the body positive activist she’d set herself up to be, she could have left labels out of it and simply replied that she was proud of her body even if others see her outside of the Hollywood norm. But she couldn’t let it go, because fat is so deeply stigmatized as “bad.”

Fat phobia is everywhere, but these days, it’s a more significant stressor than ever because so many of us have been more sedentary on quarantine. As somebody with an eating disorder, I can tell you that all of the memes about weight gain during the pandemic got really old really fast.

And we’re not even out of the woods yet.

Some folks might say that the fat jokes and fat memes I’m seeing have simply struck a nerve in me. Plenty of people have argued that I need to lighten up my attitude about fat jokes, and that if I don’t like them, I should just lighten up… and lose the weight.