Finding the Creativity in Every Writer

Chasing that lost creativity when you are a writer over fifty

By Vor Da on iStock (image licensed by author)

“Every child is an artist/creative. The problem is how to remain an artist once he or she grows up.” — Pablo Picasso

What attracted me to writing was not the writing, but the writer’s life. The writing life is another way of talking about what it means to be an artist, to find an outlet for your creativity, to live every day of your life chasing your own creative potential.

I worked my way through college as a photographer, newspaper reporter and editor. The pay was pathetic, but I still remember the thrill of seeing a photo I created on the front page of the daily paper with my byline under it.

These were the days of film where you loaded your own rolls, shot the picture, then spent a few hours locked in a darkroom processing the film and printing the pictures. Compared to today, where a good digital camera lets you see what you captured immediately, shooting pics back in the day was a game of patience where you rushed back to the offices to process your film and find out just how good you were that day.

There was creativity in the work I never experienced in any other job I held, except when I became a writer. The photographer’s life was my first attempt at the artist’s life, something I did not understand at the time and took years to rediscover again.

It also took me several more decades to learn that my creativity did not die in my youthful days of picture taking and writing columns for newspapers.

Creativity is something we are all born with, but if unused, we assume it has died within us… but what once was can be again.

Many of us over fifty trying to begin second, or third, careers as writers spent our working years in jobs that denied, or seemingly killed our creativity. Accountants, mid-level office managers, engineers or teachers spend long years mastering their jobs, but while you can be creative within all of these fields, the life of the artist is denied to them all.

Creativity is a need in life as powerful as the need to breathe for many of us

Working and making money seldom gives us the endorphin rush you can get from walking the streets with a camera at first light or sitting at your writing desk, lost to time, while your mind is totally focused on the article at hand. The rest of life, it seems, is just spending time until I can get back to my desk.

When you are a person of a certain age, you are often told you have gone past your creative expiration date, that creativity is something you must be young to own, and we quit on ourselves thinking we have arrived at our dream too far along in life. Here are a few thoughts on rekindling the creative process when the world tells you that you might be too late.

The quality does not matter to the process

I spent a year writing a novel that will never see the light of day. It was a horrible book that was a wonderful experience. The ritual of getting up early and spending an hour a day banging on my computer became the best part of my day. The feeling of happiness of printing out a finished chapter and adding it to my working manuscript still makes me happy to think about over twenty years later.

The creation process, where every morning I was a writer who was writing, became the goal, not the book itself. When finished, I let my long suffering significant read it, stuck it at the back of my file cabinet, then moved on to nonfiction, where I found both a source for creativity, but also something I was decent at and could make money doing it.

There will be those of you who write because you must, meaning you find writing the one outlet in your life where you discover that creativity hidden away on the back shelf of your mind for so many years still works and has something to say to the world.

Creativity is a lazy beast

If not challenged, creativity is like a teenage kid on a Saturday morning that needs to be blasted out of bed around noon or he or she would sleep all day.

Go beyond your writing to get your creativity going again. Challenging your mind to solve new creative problems energizes the source and this born-again creativity will spill over into your writing too.

Writing daily is the only way to write if you want to create a creative mindset. Writing daily forces you to expand your mind and the writing solutions you need to create. But mastering photography on something besides a phone, painting (much worse than my failed novel), or doing other types of art, such as metal work, makes my mind work by forcing me do something I totally commit to for hours at time. When you have to be creative, the creativity will surface again.

Do the work and talent will arrive

We read other writers and sigh at the quality of their craftmanship; “How did they do that,” we ask ourselves, “they make it look so easy. I wish I had that talent?”

You do have that talent, but we call it hard work these days. Talent arrives when creativity meets mastering the basics of the craft you are pursuing.

New photographers, using a high-end camera, often spend more time adjusting dials and figuring out the tech on their camera then they do seeing the photo they are chasing. They simply haven’t mastered the basics of their craft yet, and their lack of work gets in the way of their creativity mind.

Writers who dream of writing when they are over fifty have been writing for their entire lives, yet now you need to start again. Writing a professional business document is writing, and takes skill as a writer to create, but that writing does not translate well to the novel you want to create. You have written your entire life, but you have not yet mastered the craftsmanship it takes to write well and get read.

You have to set creativity free by making the technical side of writing as second nature as breathing. If you are trying to madly scribble an article at 6:00 in the morning, sitting in the back of a coffee shop, all the nuances of good writing, such as sentence construction, voice, length of paragraphs, character development, or any of the hundreds of other base skills every writer needs to acquire, have to be already in your head. You mangling a paragraph because you do not understand the rules of the craft will defeat even the best of your ideas.