Why I’m as Grateful as Ever for Sobriety

Although sobriety doesn’t solve every problem, it certainly makes them easier to deal with.

Abstaining from alcohol isn’t going to magically make the coronavirus disappear, or give me back more hours at work. But it can help me improve my response to these problems.

If I had never quit drinking, I’d probably be drinking even more now than I had been before. With more free time and nowhere to go, it would have been easy to stay in a permanent state of intoxication.

Whether I drank more or not, drinking would have been draining my bank account. When I was still a drinker, I used to spend a minimum of $10 a day on beer (often much more). That adds up quickly, and would really be hurting my wallet right now since I’m dealing with lower income than normal.

I am incredibly grateful not to have this totally unnecessary expense in my life right now. Instead, I can remain relatively comfortable and not have to be stressing even more about money.

Drinking also would have kept me even more house-bound than I am now. The rules in my state allow going outside to exercise, and I’ve regularly been taking advantage of this to go on runs.

My daily runs are literally my only time outside of the house each day, and I think I’d be going crazy without them. If I was still drinking, I’d either be too drunk or too hungover to actually convince myself to exercise. I’m grateful for my sobriety because it allows me to stick with this healthy habit instead.

My day-to-day life lately has been more boring and stressful than usual, but I’m still managing to get things done, stay in contact with friends, and have occasional fun. I wouldn’t have managed any of that if I was spending all day drunk on the couch.

There’s no perfect response to the coronavirus. It’s a bad situation that none of us can fix on an individual level. With that said, taking alcohol out of the equation has helped me to better cope with all of the restrictions.

I’ll never think “I need a beer” again.