Prediction 1. The economic crisis in the United States will be deeper and more protracted than that of our economic competitors.

It doesn’t have to be this way, of course, and there may still be time to ensure this is not the outcome. But the reality is that our nation has made a series of decisions over the past 50 years that has created underlying fragilities in our economy. These decisions have made our economy less effective in good times, and now, in the midst of what could be the worst economic crisis of our lifetime, those decisions may lead to our undoing.

Photo by Mick Haupt on Unsplash

We now know that the United States is experiencing a uniquely steep trajectory of coronavirus cases compared to other countries. It’s been remarkable to watch how even after learning about the experiences of other countries and imposing travel restrictions, still we were unable to flatten the curve of cases or deaths.

There’s a reason. Consider this: The United States is one of only two of the countries of which the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development is comprised which, at the onset of the crisis, did not have a nationwide policy in place providing all workers with the right to stay home and not lose a day’s pay if they fell sick, according to the University of California Los Angeles World Policy Center. The other country is South Korea. About 25 percent of all U.S. workers and a staggering 7 out of 10 low-income U.S. workers did not have access to paid sick days when the crisis hit.

This lack of paid sick days isn’t a simple omission. It is part of a pattern, one in which the United States lags behind all our economic competitors in ensuring that the people who make up our economy have access to what they need to be healthy.

It is important to note, however, that some states and cities across the United States have enacted policies to ensure access to paid sick days and paid family and medical leave. As of January 2020, more than 30 jurisdictions have laws on the books that give workers the right to paid sick days. On top of that, another eight states and the District of Columbia have, or soon will put in place, insurance systems to provide extended family and medical leave to recover from a serious illness or care for a seriously ill family member.