New Harbor, Maine — Photo by Mike Lukianoff

Flattening the Many Curves

Curves are Local — and Even Small Outbreaks Can Devastate Smaller Communities

As I talk to people about social distancing and read opinion pieces that oppose sheltering mandates, I’m struck by how confused people appear to be about the purpose and value of social distancing and the meaning of ‘flattening the curve’. Very simply put, mass-quarantine/social distancing serves one main purpose — stop everyone from getting sick at the same time. When everyone gets sick simultaneously it crushes the medical response capabilities AND exacerbates the death toll. It’s not to permanently save people from becoming infected — it’s really just to delay the inevitable so that more of us survive it. Many people, including some US Senators, continue to point top-line statistics supporting the position that cost of social distancing is worse than the virus itself. Without addressing the serious moral and ethical questions of opting for sacrificing lives for GDP, it seems we at least owe it to our sacrificial lambs to get the facts straight on what social distancing does/doesn’t do.

Lack of Testing Made a Broad Lockdown Necessary: People have talked/written about taking a more surgical approach to containing the virus. Looking at S. Korea as a case study — early, massive testing and tracking back social contacts of the infected, with draconian enforcement nationally helped them to contain the virus. The fact that people without symptoms can carry and spread the virus makes testing even more important for containment than any of its viral predecessors. This has been widely known since at least January (despite a US Governor claiming to have found out on April 2nd). Without widespread testing that is tracked by the CDC, there will be no way to manage a controlled lift of the local quarantines without creating another outbreak. It’s too late for mass-testing to save us from the need for mass-quarantine, but mass testing needs to be in place in order to get us out of it.

Flattening the Curve is About Managing Healthcare Capacity: No, we are not all sequestered until a vaccine or better therapies are developed (although that should happen simultaneously). The primary purpose of the sequestration is to try to keep the number of people in the hospitals below the maximum capacity of the hospitals that can care for them. Since different geographies were hit at different times and have different medical capacities, each state and local municipality will look very different. For a helpful site to gain perspective on the different State curves see https://covid19.healthdata.org/projections. Although it’s hard to know whether the projections on number of cases for most states will prove to be accurate with such low testing levels, the integration of capacity constraints should make it a very useful tool to understand localized risk.

“Natural” Mortality Rate of the Virus is Irrelevant if Healthcare System is Beyond Capacity: Because of poor testing, the estimates of the natural mortality rate of the virus have been hard to nail down. One thing that seems increasingly certain is that those suggesting that it’s ‘just like the flu’ are likely off by a magnitude of 7–10x. However, even IF COVID-19 had a natural mortality rate as low as the seasonal flu — its rate of spread through the population increases the total number of people requiring medical care to the point that people who would have otherwise been saved, will die. Take this as an oversimplified example of how a system that exceeds capacity amplifies the results:

Virus X has infected 1000 people, it has a normal mortality rate of 1%, and 10% reach the point of requiring a ventilator for survival. If the local hospital only has 100 ventilators (assuming hard constraints, no improvised inventions). If the same virus spreads to 2000 people, the capacity constraints shut out everyone above the first 100 who needed a ventilator. Assuming no one who needs a ventilator can survive without one, and the normal mortality rate applies to people who get one. In this simplified example the rate of fatalities skyrockets from 1% to 6%.

Obviously, in the real world, the line between over/under capacity isn’t quite as clear, but the consequences when you hit the tipping point can realistically increase mortality rates many times over — especially at a LOCAL LEVEL. There are many more constraints on capacity, including staffing, ICU beds, medicine etc. Models that try to project total fatalities from the COVID pandemic at an aggregate level by simply taking the total national infected population estimate and multiply by a static mortality rate do not account for local capacity constraints and therefore grossly underestimate the human cost of doing nothing.

Looking Ahead: As strong as the voices are urging us to get back to work before the virus has even hit its apex, a premature ‘return to normal’ will take another terrible toll on human life and deal a second catastrophic blow on the economy. In order for us to ‘get back to work’ it’s going to require a massive testing regime and a well coordinated, targeted quarantine system to ensure that the healthy are protected and the virus carriers are sequestered. This doesn’t only require testing — but also vigilant centralize tracking of results and fast action plans to quickly quash reemergence of outbreaks. This is how we will get back to work — but there is no indication that there is any leadership at the Federal level that is capable of achieving anything on this scale. If the ‘get back to work’ order eventually comes without billions of rapid COVID tests in circulation, and a national plan for quarantine and containment before we ‘reopen for business’ we will find ourselves back at square one again — in localized lockdowns trying to ‘manage the curves’.