New York fosters a strange community where calamity earns your credibility. Did you go to court with your landlord yet (I did)? Were you here for 9/11 (I wasn’t)? Did you lose your heat in the bomb cyclone (I did)? Did you lose your power in Hurricane Sandy (I didn’t)? Have you been unable to sleep because of a loud party (only once!)? Have you been pickpocketed on the subway (never did)? Have you had a $1,000 monthly rent hike (oh yeah)? Have you lived through a garbage strike (thankfully no)? Did a heroin dealer move into your building (yup — that happened)?

This is a city that reliably serves up a few dozen reasons to leave with every passing year. The struggle surrounds you with every rent check, a 30 day hustle neverending salt-and-peppered with punk rock shows, comedy specials, ferry trips, circus sideshows, showtunes and the best food in the world. It’s not for everybody, which is why I think New Yorkers are so stingy with their title. If you can make it through those ten years, they reckon you’ve earned the right to call yourself whatever the fuck you want.

For my part, I’m still here because of the community the struggle engenders. During those ten years, you’ll huddle with your neighbors and plot your rent strike. You’ll get your coffee comped twice a week because you’re a regular. You’ll drop a hefty tip for the bartender giving you an extra happy hour token. A cop will help carry your couch to the curb as you’re moving out. You’ll get an extra $100 for the band for being nice to the sound guy and bringing a crowd that tips well. A taxi driver will drop off the wallet you left in his car after his shift.

Game respects game in a singular way here. We all share a common adversary — surviving in the city that we love. You get tough as nails living out here and you are surrounded by the same. Being surrounded by millions who share that strength of will provides, then, a singular confidence going into something we know will last long and disrupt everything we know.

This town can’t get killed by coronavirus any more than it could from British cannons or factory fires or stock market crashes or historic blizzards or draft riots or heatwaves or hurricanes or subway bombings or plane crashes.

New York endured dozens of epidemics: four different years of cholera, three different years of yellow fever, two years of the Spanish flu, polio, typhoid, and HIV.

Surviving disaster is a New York way of life. The knowing nod from one New Yorker on the sidewalk is participation in a tradition of solidarity since lower Manhattan was a Dutch beaver pelt market. You are crossing paths for no other reason than that both of you want to be here.

People uncharitably call this “being tough.” This will be yet another occasion where we reinstruct the world that this is might.