People everywhere, all across the globe, are struggling in their own ways with this unprecedented crisis, and we’re all likely riding a similar roller coaster of emotions, from fear to rage to depression to hope and right back to fear all over again.

Some are stuck working in retail, helping us all survive by meeting our basic yet essential needs; others are trapped at borders, in migrant camps, in Gaza, in prison, where this virus will likely wreak the most havoc; many are on the front-lines of this war, in emergency rooms that have become ICUs, in nursing homes that have been shut off from visitors for weeks.

Then there are those of us, safe and isolated in the comfort of our homes, no matter how small, no matter how light-deprived, no matter how rambunctious or empty, how dirty or clean. We’re being forced to be “still,” and for many, it’s the first time we’ve ever had to do that. To just be.

But it’s hard as hell to just “be” when the world around you is in chaos. It’s hard as hell to look into the abyss of uncertainty stretching out before you and feel anything resembling calm. It’s hard as hell to look at your dwindling bank account and wonder if you’ll be able to buy groceries for your children. It’s hard as hell to have to just sit back and witness, but, often, that’s the only option we’re given.

So, what then?

There is no one-size-fits-all when it comes to being, or healing, or experiencing grief. That should be clear. And there certainly seems to be no one-size-fits-all to this virus, either, and how it invades our bodies, other than the truth of its real danger.

All I can offer, if it’s worth a damn thing in this upside-down world, are mere bits of the pieces I’ve been able to bring together throughout my own ongoing grieving process that has come with facing a future riddled with unknowns, and doing it with little guidance or support.

1. Remember that life has always been, and likely always will be, outside of your control.

Grim, right? I suppose it depends on how you choose to view it.

Pema Chodron, an American Tibetan Buddhist, teaches and talks often about the idea of groundlessness, how life’s constant shifting gives us nothing to stand on. Her teachings helped me, and still help me, make sense of my own suffering throughout the years and understand that although I can manage my pain and grief, I cannot control it.

Because, in many ways, living with a chronic illness is living your life with no ground; at least, that’s one way I can describe it. And what we’re collectively experiencing right now feels just like that — the earth has shifted, as it always has, and now, we have to find a way to stand on it.

We don’t know when this outbreak will end, though we know going back to “normal” is going to take at least through the summer. We don’t know when we’ll see our loved ones next. We don’t know when the Grim Reaper is going to come to our door.

But, one truth that hit me as I was coming to terms with my condition a few years back, and one that is helping me stay afloat amidst this moment in time, was that this was always the case. We’ve always just been flopping around like fish, as the Buddha is known to have said and as is written in The Dhammapada:

Flopping like a fish thrown on dry ground, it trembles all day, struggling.

Right now, we’re all fucking fish because we’re humans.

Which brings me to my next point…

2. Show yourself grace.

We’re human, believe it or not. Unfortunately, we all forget that sometimes. Now, however, is not the best time for that.

Experiencing trauma is, somehow, always really good at making us forget our own humanity. For quite some time, during my pain flares, I would beat myself up internally while stuck lying in bed for days at a time because my body felt like someone had beaten me up externally.

I gave myself shit for things outside of my control, which made me too exhausted to do anything about the things I could control.

It was a mess, and it accomplished nothing. All I wanted was ground, you see, and a little grace.

It took me longer than I would like to admit to realize I certainly wasn’t going to find grace without first offering some to myself. I learned, and am still learning, how to let myself feel, even if it means I feel shitty. Feeling it all will let you awaken to yourself, and as Mark Epstein said in his 2013 book The Trauma of Everyday Life,

There may be nothing else to do with the traumas that befall us than to use them for our own awakenings.

3. Ask yourself, at least once a day, what you have to be grateful for in that moment.

Listen, it’s not easy. There are times when I feel I have nothing. During a pain flare, especially at night, when I’m rolling around in my bed covered in ice packs and heating pads at the same time because it feels like I have battery acid burning through my bones and a cheese grater shredding apart my muscles, I can’t see anything other than the tears in my eyes.

Yet, I always know that nothing is permanent and that I am still breathing clean air, safe in my bed, and, one day, one hour, the pain will lessen. I tell myself to be grateful for my life-changing medical marijuana, for my doctors for doing their best, for my friends for being understanding, for my co-workers who help me when they can.

Practicing gratitude is proven to increase one’s sense of happiness, and it doesn’t hurt your health, either. Right now, amidst this crisis, it is too easy to forget what you have. But if this has taught us anything, I would like to think it has been that we should never take a damn thing for granted.

4. Accept the help.

If you’re stubborn like me, accepting help when you’re already in a vulnerable situation makes you feel even more vulnerable. And stubborn people hate that.

Right now is not a time for stubbornness.

We are all going to have to make sacrifices, and we are all going to need some sort of help. Just accept it.

That’s it.

5. Laugh.

Seriously. Don’t be so serious! Do you think no one ever laughed during The Great Depression?

Laughing strengthens your immunity, no joke, and we all certainly need to have the strongest immune systems possible. For those of us with weakened ones, it’s more important than ever that we stay in good spirits.

Personally, watching stand-up comedy has become a lifeline for me throughout the years, and I plan on watching even more in these coming weeks and months.

It’s vital we stay human during this “lockdown,” and remember to celebrate, to experience joy, to make someone else laugh, and allow others to make us smile.