Howl: Special Edition

Have Sex for the Good of the World

There’s no better reason (especially today).

Are you feeling a little frisky lately? You could blame the isolation of quarantine. You could say it’s the unfolding of spring.

But there’s also a sacred shift happening in the Northern Hemisphere right now — the passage of time that marks nature’s most fertile period. In the Celtic tradition, today is Beltane, a celebration of the first day of summer. As a time of the year that stands exactly opposite of Samhain (October 31st/November 1st), this day, like its counterpart, is said to be magical, a time of the year when the boundaries between the worlds are at their thinnest. It’s an ideal time to expand one’s consciousness.

Further, it welcomes the strengthening of the earth, the energy of life, at a time of year when all living beings are still quite vulnerable. The frosts are not necessarily over. The weather might be uncertain. The tender shoots of greens poking up through the ground might not survive to maturity. This is a beautiful moment to recognize our own vulnerability and lean into the optimism of the natural world, taking a chance and reaching for the sun.

I love to practice a little sex magic around this time of year. Sexuality is both sacred and profane, and while we are champions at celebrating the profane, we don’t tend to pay as much attention to the sacred side of sex. Utilizing moments in time when the energy of the earth can support us in our most intentional sexual explorations is a wonderful way to remind ourselves of the sacred aspects of our sexuality.

I also once read that part of the sex rituals that are associated with Beltane were practiced as a way to protect and affirm the fertility of the earth. That the act of sex could create an energy that would encourage those plants to keep growing, celebrate the way they sustain our lives, and recognize the interconnectedness between all living species.

In other words: sometimes we should have sex for the good of the world. What better reason is there than that?

Be intentional

We don’t need to spend a lot of time philosophizing about sex or over-complicating it in our everyday lives. We can just do it because it feels good.

But it’s also nice to take a moment from time to time to be really intentional about sex. Whether you’re single or in a relationship, it’s so important to remember that sex can bring us more deeply into our own bodies and physical experience, which helps us stay present and grounded. When engaging in sex with another person, an intentional approach can help us more deeply connect with one another.

Every little moment in an encounter like this deserves our attention and consideration:

How do we want to prepare our bodies and souls for this experience?

How do we want to prepare our physical space for this experience?

What do we want to wear?

How do we want to feel?

How do we want a partner to feel?

What do we want to focus on?

Life is a strange experience in which nothing really matters and everything matters. Everything is insignificant and everything is of monumental importance. Somehow, both exist at the same time.

We might not put much thought into the average sexual encounter, but let’s balance that perspective of ordinariness with a reverence we don’t usually give to sex by paying attention to every little detail.

Cleanse

Prepare for a sacred sexual experience by cleansing yourself and your space beforehand.

Clean up the area where you will be enjoying your intimate experience. Put away the clutter. Give it a nice dusting and vacuuming. Put clean sheets on the bed. Light a sage wand or put a favorite essential oil in your diffuser.

And don’t forget to add the elements you want to include in your ritual. A candle, perhaps. A special object. Tools for energy work. All your favorite sex toys, clean and ready to go.

If you can, arrange to enjoy your sexual experience outdoors, in which case you might have little to no “cleaning up” to do. Just make sure you have the supplies that you want, like blankets, pillows, or other such items. If you can’t do this outdoors, bring the outdoors in — open a window, play nature sounds, or place flowers by the bed.

Take a shower or a bath. Do it together if you are part of a couple (or thruple, or…) or enjoy it by yourself if you are single.

Think about the symbolism of letting go of old energies that no longer serve you, beliefs that cause you pain, doubts or shame that prevent you from experiencing all the pleasure that you deserve. Let the water make you new again.

Touch yourself or your lover(s) with great tenderness while you shower or bathe. Let your fingers mimic the water, eager to envelope every curve of your body. Let love and attention and appreciation flow from your hands into your lover’s body, or your own.

Build the energy

Take your time with your experience. Let this be a special moment in which you take as much time to enjoy yourself as you want. There’s no hurry.

Get as grounded in your body as you can. Feel every sensation, whether you are alone or with a partner. Savor the pleasure. Let yourself get entirely lost in it.

Bring yourself or your partner near to orgasm again and again without letting go until the pressure is so intense, you feel like you will pop. If it feels right, share your desires with your partner — sexual and non-sexual. Everything. Whatever you want in life. If you are single, simply speak this aloud and let the universe be your witness.

If you want to set an intention or make a goal for this summer season (sexual or not), share it now, either with your partner, or simply by speaking it aloud.

And yes, please take a moment during this time to remember your connection to the natural world. You are an animal. You are part of nature. You are wild and primal. Everything is connected to you and you to everything. Experience this pleasure as part of the greater design of life, letting it seep out of you and into the world around you.

Let go

Try to let go entirely when you reach orgasm. Let yourself respond without a filter. If you want to make noise, make noise (even if the windows are open). Don’t edit yourself or your physical response.

See if you can settle even more deeply into your body. Sink into the pleasure. Let yourself get so lost in it that you lose your sense of time and space. Take advantage of the thinning between the worlds (if you believe in that sort of thing) and dare to fall through the veils, letting your consciousness travel as far as it wants to.