*This is my final exam essay for the Theories of Regional Economic Development class. The essay prompt is explaining the agglomeration that emerges in the economy to manage trade, communication, and business. I have to consider: 1) the agglomeration that happens amidst the communication and technology development. 2) the ways of communication in the industry and their geography 3) the relationship of agglomeration to minimize communication cost and business performance. I pick high-tech industry as my essay focus.*

San Jose (source: google maps)

A new high-tech economy has emerged from the technological change of the third industrial revolution. It has formed a new geographical formation of spatially converged and globally dispersed (Storper, 2018). The spatially converge geography consists of the core part of the start-up economy that is continually innovating. While the spatially disperse geography consists of the part of the mature industrial production that attributes to assist the core. I will discuss and explain spatial dualism and underlying factors. In the first part of the piece, I focus on the spatially disperse of the mature part of the economy. In the second part of the essay, I focus on the spatially agglomerated of the innovative part of the economy.

The high-tech industry has a mature part and immature parts. The mature part of the high-tech sector mass-produces fully developed products like personal computers or mobile phone hardware. The beginning part focuses on technological innovation and the advancement of high-tech products like personal computer or mobile phone. The mature industry disperses spatially, and the immature part converges spatially driven by their progress and need.

The progress that the hardware manufacturing, for example, enables them to have a long and spatially dispersing production chain. The long and dispersing production chain mainly attributed to the development of industrial standardization, technological innovation, and communication advancement (Norton & Rees, 1979). The development of a global economic institution, like free trade, has also enabled the production chain to expand overseas.

The industry progress enables the mature part of the high-tech economy to disperse domestically or globally (Duranton and Puga, 2007; Norton & Rees, 1979). Internally, the mature high-tech industry two patterns of dispersal: within city-region and between city-regions. In the first pattern, the mature high-tech industry develops the hardware production center within the suburb of the core industry’s metropolitan area. This process is called industrial suburbanization (Norton & Rees, 1979). On the second pattern, the mature high-tech industry set-up a hardware production in another metropolitan. Compare to the previous industrial revolution, the high-tech industry has a longer global production chain. Their hardware productions appear on different global metropolitans outside the USA (Norton & Rees, 1979).

The hardware production, domestically or globally, finds a location that provides benefits for the mature industry. The mature industry usually seeks a site that offers a supporting industrial environment, lower production costs, proximity to a similar sector, and access to cheap labor pool (Duranton and Puga, 2007; Norton & Rees, 1979; Storper, 2018). The maturity of the industry gives the option for the hardware production to leave expensive core cities and relocate to the new cost-efficient locations. The mature industries usually disperse in the industrial estates — it is scattering but also stays in small agglomeration enclaves. Within the new cluster, the mature high-tech industry benefits localized innovation feedback such as sharing intermediate hardware inputs, matching hardware production labors, and learning from a similar mature high-tech sector.

The mature high-tech production often finds in the global city-region that offers them more productivity than the domestic industrial estates. The global industrial estates usually have a better, stable, and economical production chain (Norton & Rees, 1979). The mature-high tech also disperses in more than on industrial estates — for example, the hardware components produced by the different industrial parks around the world on the worldwide city-region such as Coastal China, South Korea, Japan, South Asia, or South East Asia city-region. Later, the different hardware components assemble in the Coastal China industrial estates.

Meanwhile, the high-tech economy core is a beginning part of the economy that has a lot of uncertainty. The uncertainty is specifically higher because the core becomes the command, control, and innovation nodes for the dispersed and matured production. As the industry more disperse, the executive decision making and team strategy are geographically sensitive — it needs to collocate. The core of high-tech industries converges in a few superstar cities. There are two reasons why geographical proximity is more important than ever: a need for face-to-face communication and a strategy to sustaining performance.

The communication dimension is one of the linchpins why the new economy has both the national/global dispersion and convergence in the core cities. In the high-tech industry, there is two communication patter: codified and non-codified communication. The codified information is the standardized information that developed in the mature industry. This information enables the mature part of the new economy is exportable and dispersible. This codified communication dimension is not geographically sensitive.

In contrast, there is part of the high-tech industry that is still in the beginning and innovating. A face-to-face meeting is particularly important for this stage where the information is imperfect, rapidly changing, and not easily codified (Storper and Venables, 2004). Furthermore, geographical proximity is more important for the core because of the complexity of managing dispersed and elongated manufacture chains. The reduction of communication and transportation cost, frankly, adding more complexity to the industry’s core. The core of the economy needs more face-to-face communication to address complexity. The agglomeration in superstar cities enhances as the high-tech industry grows. The most creative, innovative, and valuable part of the high tech-industries clustered in the world’s superstar cities. For example, the firm’s headquarter and innovation centers tend to cluster in big cities (Moretti, 2012).

Business performance is another important explanation of the high-tech industry polarization in the specific city-region (Moretti, 2012; Storper, 2018). The new economy is not agglomerate for sharing intermediate supply anymore due to their elongate transnational production chain. However, the innovative economy stays in the big cities agglomeration to gain and remain productive by accessing the benefit of sharing, matching, and learning (Duranton, et al., 2004; Storper, 2018; Kemeny and Storper, 2014.

First, the firms and laborers gain the benefit of sharing city facilities with lower real cost than building their private facilities. Second, the agglomeration in the big cities supports both firms and labor. The firms need to collocate in the pool of employment because they have a high market uncertainty that demands specific workers’ skills. In the agglomeration, innovative firms can access the pool of high-skill talents to match the firm’s demand. Third, the knowledge, skills, innovation, ideas are essential for the firms to stay ahead and competitive. Cities are the hub for knowledge and innovation — that is why the firms are agglomeration in the cities. The companies are choosing to locate in the city because they want to benefit from the learning opportunities of similar firms in the city. Furthermore, the firms agglomerate in the city because of that where the pool of labor — that brings knowledge and innovation as they circulate among firms.

However, not all cities win the high-tech industry innovation hub. Learning geography is more uneven than ever because there are only a few cities that offer learning benefits. One of the prominent examples is the agglomeration of high-tech industry headquarters in the Bay Area. The firms have a global production chain all over the world. Still, they agglomerate in the Bay Areas because of the need to have more robust communication in managing the complex business. They also stay in the Bay Area because they must keep reinventing the industry by utilizing agglomeration benefits.

The development stage of the high-tech industry is converged for the beginning part and diverged for the mature part. The most innovative, sophisticated, and essential part of the high-tech industry is spatially converging. The mature part of the high-tech industry is spatially dispersing. The spatial dualism is the strategy to build a robust communicating, maintaining strong business performance, and reducing costs.

*The overall score is 32/35. The examiner expects clarity on the example. I also make minor mistakes on the writing*