I lost my virginity when I was 18. It was my freshman year of college and I started dating a guy I met at a frat party. For our first date, we got coffee at the cafe on campus and then for our second date, I went back to his dorm room to watch Spongebob. So Netflix and Chill, basically. Except Netflix wasn’t really a thing yet in 2009, so it was more like Nickelodeon and Chill.

Little did I know that he had something else on his mind. After finishing a few episodes of the Spongebob marathon that was on TV, he told me he’d developed feelings for me and wanted to date exclusively. I said yes and we both updated our Facebook statuses to “in a relationship” with each other. And then he immediately tried to pressure me into having sex with him.

Now 18-year-old virgin me believed that you should wait a long time before sex. Like at least six months or so after you start dating. My liberal parents never really talked to me about sex as a teen, but growing up in the conservative rural Midwest, I knew that having sex outside of a committed relationship was pretty frowned upon. I remembered girls in my high school having their reputations destroyed after having casual sex and that scared me.

But I also really wanted this guy to like me. I barely dated in high school and I had a lot of insecurities from feeling like guys didn’t want me. So after about an hour or so of him begging me to have sex, I finally gave in. The whole procedure was super painful because I was so tight and neither of us really knew what we were doing, but we somehow figured it out. I then spent the night sleeping over in his dorm room and feeling so excited to finally have a real boyfriend.

Our relationship didn’t last though. He dumped me a week later and after I grilled him with questions, he finally confessed that he was never really interested in me. He just wanted to get laid.

I felt so humiliated. I gave up my virginity to that guy-something I was taught was special and meant to be saved for my first serious relationship-only to have him tell me “it was just sex” and to not take it so seriously. So after spending the next day crying and feeling like an idiot, I figured he might actually be on to something.

Now on the one hand, I knew that guy was a jerk and that wasn’t my fault. But I also knew that I never wanted to feel taken advantage of like that again.

I also was reminded of a similar experience I’d had with a different guy just a few months earlier. I met him on Facebook a few weeks after I graduated high school and we talked on MSN Messenger every day for about a month. Our online friendship quickly became romantic and I fell for him hard and fast, mostly just because the attention felt so good.

But the only downside was that he lived in another town about an hour away and I didn’t have a car. He did, but his hometown was bigger and had more things to do than my hometown, so we agreed that I would travel to him. We made plans to go to the mall together and then see a movie and get dinner, and I begged my dad to drive me. I think we saw Transformers. The Megan Fox one.

After the movie was over, we got dinner at Subway and then made out in the parking lot. I felt like I was on top of the world when I kissed him. But then the following day, he texted me saying he was no longer interested.

That really pissed me off because I felt like he’d led me on by kissing me. But when I told him that, his response was “it was just a kiss.”