How To Cope With Having To Give Up Your Pets After a Breakup

No longer being an active part of their life feels like you’re missing a fundmental part of yourself, like you’ve lost a child.

Photo by Jonas Vincent on Unsplash

When Things Get Serious

There are certain milestones in a relationship that prove its getting serious. Arguably the most indicative of these milestones is the decision to move in together.

Sharing space with your significant other is a paradigm shift. No longer do you each have a different definition of “home”. No longer are you capable of retreating to the privacy of your own space when things get tense. No longer is your “home” something purely of your own design. This is where you discover what your relationship truly is as well as what it can be, both good and bad.

Sharing a home is a simultaneously joyous, horrifying, and transformative experience that forces you to confront the staggering degree of responsibility inherent in making such a bold step forward. It’s a milestone heavy enough on its own, but becomes even heavier as you begin to welcome all else that it implies.

Milestone After Milestone

A few years into our relationship, my partner and I decided to make this step forward and move in together. There is such an intense bond created by nurturing a home with someone you love. Every little detail — from the paint, to the decor, to the furniture, to the wattage of a lightbulb — feels like this beautiful synchronization between the two of you. Every detail is a symbol of who and what you are together. Everything about your home comes to remind you of your partner.

It makes you crave more. You want to continue building and growing together, making your home an ever-evolving sanctuary. You want to take on more and more responsibility together within that shared space simply because it brings you closer, making the relationship that much stronger. And with each shared addition and decision, more and more pivotal milestones in the relationship are met.

You begin to share finances. You get behind-the-scenes access to each other’s most unflattering of behaviors. You begin making little plans and schemes for the future. You begin to share a mind. And you inevitably reach these points where you want to share and expand your love in increasingly complex new forms.

For us — and as with many others — one of these points expressed itself in our desire to adopt two cats.

Pets Are Children

Along with living together and having children, adopting a pet is easily one of the most powerful experiences you can share with your partner. It’s yet another incredibly charged decision packed with responsibility and initially unforseen implications.

Little else compares to the moment you bring a pet home together.

Just like with children, pets force you to grow as a couple. They require you to equally share a responsibility for a life other than your own. It makes you realize just how creative, far-reaching, influential, and powerful a relationship can be. You begin to see how another soul can use the love and living space of your relationship as the basis for its own experience. That’s something truly heavy as well as supremely beautiful if you decide to let that soul into your life.

And with each pet brought in, the love in your relationship begins to express itself in ways you never before imagined. Your connection stretches and grows as each cat, dog, or what-have-you becomes an equally vital part of who you are as a couple and as an individual.

I know many people feel the same way, but bringing our cats home together felt like we had just had children. It felt biological, as if these two cats were literally part of our blood and our DNA. There was an instant bond, an understanding that even the life of an animal was one worthy of giving everything you had to. We instantly and instinctually knew that there was nothing that we wouldn’t do for our cats to make sure they were happy and overflowing with love.

They became a part of our soul together as couple.

They became a part of our soul as individuals.

Plain and simple, our cats were our children.

When A Relationship Ends

Even the most seemingly perfect relationship can come to an end. You can love someone with the entirety of your being, and somewhere along the line it can still fall apart. No one is safe from this fact. And implicit in any failed relationship is the drastic reconstruction of everything your life has become. The things that you once took for granted — like your living space, your finances, and ultimately your pets — are immediately uprooted from your life.

After my own breakup, I moved out and had to leave my cats behind with my ex in the home we had shared as a family. There is nothing quite like waking up in a new place without the person you once loved at your side. And there is absolutely nothing like waking up in a new place without your cats curled up on the edge of your bed like they always are each morning. There is nothing quite like sitting up in bed to listen to the silence that was once filled by your cats’ meows for breakfast.

Plain and simple, there is nothing quite like no longer living with your pets, these beings that feel like nothing less than your children.

No longer seeing my cats everyday is a pain that I didn’t know I would ever have to feel, and is one that I’m still learning to cope with despite it having been my reality for nearly two years now. I still feel like a truly vital part of myself, and my life as a whole, is missing. I feel like some existentially essential core has been ripped from the center of my chest. It’s gotten better, but not without having to come to terms with the gravity of such a reality time and time again.

Appreciate The Small Things While You Can

No longer coming home each day from work and hearing my babies run up the stairs, charge down the hall, or leap from atop a cat-tree to greet me at the door with their distinct meows hurts more than I can put into words.

I miss playing with them. I miss cuddling them. I miss petting them. I miss holding them. I miss lounging around with them. I miss being playfully manipulated into giving them treats. I miss those weekends when I would sleep in a little too late for their liking, only to be woken up by their kneading on my back, or with a gentle head-butt, or as they repeatedly walked across my chest until I got the hint…

I even miss the things about them that felt like chores at the time. Cleaning out their litter box each day was something I often dreaded, but would now readily welcome. Being woken up early to feed them breakfast now feels like the best alarm I could ever ask for to start my day. Having them endlessly meow and try to get me to play after an exhausting day at work when all I wanted to do was take it easy, now feels like the most relaxing thing in the world to me. I even miss them scratching our sofa to shreds despite the fact that they had over 10 scratching posts strategically placed around the house.

It’s all of the simple little things I shared with them that feel so big and heavy now that they’re missing from my life.

I miss opening up windows for them to sit in and smell the outside air. I miss hearing their little chirps whenever they saw a bird or a squirrel. I miss seeing their pupils dilate moments before they pounced on a toy. I miss hearing them running up and down the hall when they had a case of the zoomies. I miss hearing them play with a loud toy in the middle of the night. I miss putting on YouTube videos of birds to keep them entertained when my partner and I went out for the night.

I miss that intense feeling of trust and acceptance whenever they decided to jump into my lap. I miss being on the verge of pissing myself simply because it broke my heart to rouse them from my lap just so I could go to the bathroom. I miss opening their food cupboard and hearing them both come darting down the hall for dinner. I miss studying their buddha-sphinx-zen facial expressions that every cat gets when they relax with their eyes closed, bathed in the sunlight pouring through the window. I miss seeing their tails flail and flop around like they had a mind of their own.

I miss their purrs.

I miss the fucking cat hair that coated literally every square inch of our home.

I just miss my cats, plain and simple.

Ways To Cope

During the past two years in which they’ve largely been missing from my life, I’ve learned to cope in numerous ways that might help anyone else going through the same situation in their own breakup.

If you’re fortunate like me and your breakup was an amicable and mutual decision made out of respect for one another, then take every opportunity you can to visit your pets. Try to schedule times when you can visit them alone, especially if it’s unhealthy for you to see your ex. If you and your ex are both comfortable with visitations, make sure you make every brief moment count. This means making each and every pet, purr, cuddle, and play session the most involved and present you’ve ever been with them. Don’t forget to take a picture or two while you’re there.

Another method I’ve used to keep active in their lives is more distant but just as rewarding. And plus, if your relationship ended on a more sour note and visiting them in person is out of the question — which I suspect is more common amongst the majority of couples after a breakup — you can still do this one. It’s as simple as sending your pets treats and toys through the mail. Surely even the most hostile of exes would allow you to do this, simply for the sake of your cats and for the free goods that they wouldn’t have to purchase themselves.

I’ve also used the following method to cope despite it being a potentially risky one in regards to emotional health, but that also has the potential to be extremely therapeutic if you can remain disciplined. It’s as simple as occasionally visiting a local shelter to spend an afternoon visiting with the animals. Admittedly, this method can wear you down emotionally, send your grief for your pets spiraling out of control, and make you want to adopt every animal there…but it can also help you subtly ween yourself off of that ceaseless need to parent your pets. Moreover, make it a point to visit with the oldest animals that the shelter has. Doing so is extremely therapeutic, simply because of how appreciative the eldest are of the special attention you give them amidst all the younger, and therefore more likely to be adopted, animals they share the space with.

Finally, one of the most difficult but ultimately beautiful ways to cope with no longer living with your pets is to look at photos of them whenever you’re feeling particularly sad. Doing so will make you miss them like crazy, but it’ll make you realize that while you may not live with them anymore, nothing can ever take away the memories you share with them. Looking at their old photos can also help you be more appreciative of your ex, even if it ended on bad terms, simply because you get to mourn something truly beautiful that you shared together. Surely, no matter how your relationship ended, it was worth it if only because of the pets that enriched both of your lives together.

Prepare For A Time When You Can’t Be A Part Of Their Lives At All

I want to stress that the key word to the previous section of this article is “cope”. These methods are not a cure-all. They can only help you cope with no longer living with your pets. They can only help you heal and move on. Nothing else. They will never restore things to they way they once were. If you find yourself stressed further by any of these methods, stop doing them.

Moreover, if you are in a position in which you can still visit your pets in person, you need to begin preparing for a time in which you may no longer be able to do so. Like I explained above, everything in your relationship comes to remind you of your partner, even your pets. Therefore, if seeing your pets brings up painful emotions that are preventing you from moving on after a breakup, then visitations may be hurting more than it’s helping.

Also, it’s important to take into consideration the idea that popping in every now and then to visit your pets is potentially highly confusing and even stressful for them. Repeatedly returning after a breakup may disrupt their new paradigms/routines, in turn hindering their ability to move on from their old way of life in the same way as you’re trying to do yourself.

Love Them While You Can

No matter your situation, simply love and cherish your pets in every way that you can, while you can.

You simply never know for certain if there will come a time when they may no longer be a part of your life. So take nothing for granted, especially the people, the places, and above all the children and pets in your life.

And if such a time comes when you no longer are able to live with your babies, know that you aren’t alone. Know that no amount of distance will ever change the fact that the pets you shared with someone are nothing less than your children. They always will be your children.

Nothing happens without reason, so use your experience of loss to help you appreciate the other people, places, children, and pets that will inevitably come into your life if given time to heal and move on.

While no longer living with my cats has been heartbreaking, I’ve only come to appreciate and love them more in a way that’s helped me integrate everything I needed to learn from my relationship. It’s helped prepare me for whatever is coming my way next.

At the end of the day, my pets, my relationship, and the lessons all of this taught me are things that I refuse to take for granted. I refuse to let it all be for nothing. I refuse to let it be nothing more than a source of pain. I’m eternally grateful that I got the opportunity to share a part of my life with them. I’ll always have my memories of them and nothing can take that away from me.

One way or another, my cats will always be a vital part of my life. They will always be a vital part of who I am.

I couldn't ask for anything more.