Reaching new levels

Many runners reach a comfort zone after some time with the sport. This could be a distance, a pace, even a particular route. When we’re comfortable, we stop pushing. We stop striving for that next personal best. What we’re doing is good enough.

By knowing you can push forward to new heights, you inherently will. It’s merely a question of how much you believe it.

You’re capable of more than you think

The body was literally built to run. From the size and shape of our feet to our ability to sweat and efficiently dissipate heat, we’re genetically able to run very long distances for huge amounts of time. I’m talking 300–400 miles over several days.

Our ancestors weren’t faster or stronger than the deer, gazelles and mammoths they hunted, but they sure could outlast them.

There are super-humans today that constantly redefine what’s possible in the realm of extreme distance running. Take Courtney Dauwalter for example. She was able to complete a 240 mile race across Moab, Utah, beating everyone else by nearly 20 miles! She recently ran a 205-mile race in Tahoe, running it in just under 50 hours. Straight.

Talk about motivation for your next time out.

I’m reminded of a quote from The Matrix, my all-time favorite movie, when Morpheus says to Neo (in relation to how fast he is vs. how fast he can be):

“Don’t think you are. Know you are.”

Switch things up

Sometimes our minds need a change of scenery to spice things up. It’s like when we’re cooped up in the house too long, we start to go a little crazy. Talking a walk outside or going for a drive is the remedy.

Same goes for running. When we’re stuck at a pace for too long, or a distance, or a particular path, road or trail, we stagnate. We start to view running as an obligation rather than a pleasurable activity.

I succumb to this quite often. It’s easy for me to head out for my easy 4–5 miler on my favorite trail. I plod along, listen to some good music, and get some fresh air. But I’m not inspired by what I’m doing. I don’t have the same visceral and raw reaction I used to, where I couldn’t turn the music up loud enough, run fast enough, or love running hard enough.

Enter different training modalities. Switching up your training style can have an immensely positive mental impact on your relationship with running. You’ll find the refreshed motivation and vigor you’ve been looking for.

Tempo run / threshold training

Tempo runs, also known as lactate-threshold runs, are run at a pace at which your body clears as much lactate, a chemical byproduct of exercise, as it produces. Basically, the fastest pace you can maintain without the “dead-leg sensation” setting in:

They get the body used to running fast

They’re generally dictated by time, not mileage — great for those who travel a lot

They help develop mental toughness and concentration

They stimulate and build both fast and slow twitch muscle fibers, leading to gains in both speed and endurance

Fartlek runs

Swedish for “speed play”, Fartlek runs are as fun to run as they are to say (well, for running geeks like me they are). Unlike tempo runs, Fartleks are unstructured. Unregulated. Alternating between slow, moderate and hard efforts within a single run.

See that sign a quarter mile up the road? Sprint hard, reach the sign, then jog for a couple minutes. See that hill over there? Run up it as hard as you can. Walk down. Then fall back into your pace as you make your way home.

Think about how you used to run and play as a kid. Do that.

Think about how you first felt when you started running. Bring that same mental attitude.

Feel your body. What hurts? What doesn’t? What feels good? What needs to be stretched and rolled out? Fartleks are perfect for taking stock of your body, for identifying problem areas, and for having fun!

High intensity interval training

High Intensity Interval Training (H.I.I.T) workouts are, as the name suggests, intense. Dialed up to 11 intense.

That shouldn’t scare you, that should excite you!

When most runners think H.I.I.T., they think sprints. And they’d be right. Sprints are the best form of interval training a runner can perform.

Here’s an example:

Warmup 8–10 minutes with an easy jog

60 second CONTROLLED sprint at hard to maximum effort

Like a car at 8000 rpm, your body should be in the red (reaching hard for air, legs churning, unable to hold a conversation, counting the seconds until you can stop).

Get that heart rate up as high as possible.

Three minutes of easy jogging or walking to catch your breath

Read: easy jog. Your heart rate should come down as quickly as possible. The secret is in the recovery between sprints. The difference between your heart rate during the sprint and your heart rate during recovery is the “interval” part of interval training.

You want to run the subsequent intervals strong and finish the workout fatigued, but not completely spent.

Repeat this process 8 times

Cool down with a 5–7 minute easy jog or walk

As your fitness improves, play with your timing a bit. Up your sprint from 60 to 90 seconds. Shorten your recovery from 3 minutes to 2 minutes. Up your interval count from 8, to 10, to 12.

Make sure to never skip the initial warm-up and cool down periods.