Photo by Simon Matzinger on Unsplash

The idea that picturesque landscapes promote creativity has always been a piece of common knowledge among great artists. For centuries, writers, poets, and philosophers drew inspiration in nature walks far from the distractions of the cities. Charles Dickens, Leo Tolstoy, and Immanuel Kant are just a few examples of the great minds who recognized the role nature played in their work.

While the study of the relationship between nature and creativity is still gaining pace, the relationship between wellbeing and the natural environment has been a focus of thousands of scientific papers. Rachel and Stephen Kaplan, one of the pioneers in environmental psychology, summarize 25 years of research on the topic in the opening paragraph to their book With People in Mind: Design And Management Of Everyday Nature with two statements:

People prefer natural environments to other settings.

to other settings. There are more benefits beyond the mere fact of enjoyment.

However self-evident these conclusions may seem, there are many why’s and how’s. What’s important is the key message: we need to go out in nature as much as possible.

So, what does science tell us about the role of nature in the promotion of creativity? The short answer is it does facilitate creativity. The long version — there is more to it, and you need to know what to look for to maximize your creative potential. We’ll get to this in a minute, but first, let us talk about creativity. Specifically, what is it?

Creativity has many flavors — artistic or professional — and each has its specifics. Regardless of the type, creativity involves the active use of imagination and developing original ideas to create something new.

J.P. Guilford, an early intelligence researcher from the University of Southern California, offers a detailed view of creativity. A creative person, in his opinion, has the following characteristics:

Sensitivity: they see where the problems are. Idea generation: they have novel ideas. Flexibility: they are flexible and can approach a problem from different angles. Synthesis: they can organize the ideas into larger patterns.

Creativity, however, is more than a mere sum of characteristics. It is, rather, a process.

Graham Wallace, an English social psychologist, living and working from the late 19th to mid-20th century, proposed four phases of a creative process in his seminal book The Art of Thought. These phases are preparation, incubation, illumination, and verification. For convenience, you can find them with explanations in the image below.

As you can see, the creative process switches between conscious and unconscious. While every creative process begins with the conscious endeavor, the “aha moment” is the result of the unconscious work of our brain.

Researchers have long pointed out to mental clutter that urban setting causes in our minds. The abundance of background information our brains need to process in an average city is tremendous, and this leads to information overload and mental fatigue. This, in turn, hurts creativity, as our unconscious is too stressed to be susceptible to new ideas or to process the existing ones. The good news is natural environments turn out to be the right kind of remedy from such fatigue.

The therapeutic benefits of nature can also contribute to heightened creativity. A study from 2015 shows that nature plays an especially important role in identifying the problems and nurturing the ideas (preparation and incubation phases on the image above). Specifically, the research indicates that nature provides the person with an awakened desire to explore, frees the imagination, and does not force your thoughts in a specific direction. There also seems to be a correlation between being in nature and walking: people, who find themselves in natural surroundings, tend to walk, which stimulates the generation of ideas and increases the mood.

Inspired by this study, researchers Thomas J.L. van Rompay and Tineke Jol from the University of Twente, investigate what kind of nature is the most conducive to our creativity. Mainly, they explore the distinction between unpredictable and spacious nature vs. predictable and non-spacious scenery.