I Got Caught Sneaking Out After Really, Really Bad Sex

I was a super horny undergrad on a mission to get laid. This is where it all went wrong. One of my friends had invited me to a house party earlier in the day, so I donned my best “fuck me” frock, met her at In-N-Out (I ate way too much), then headed over to her place for some ritual pre-gaming courtesy of Popov vodka and Daft Punk. Christ.

Photo by Tamas Munkacsi on Unsplash

With our liquid courage thoroughly in tow, we clipped our way down the sidewalks of Westwood, past the cemetery, and towards the ever beckoning drumbeats of the early 2000s. We had arrived.

Another friend greeted me with a drink. Vodka and Redbull; what the fuck? Just thinking about that now, as a grown-ass woman, makes me want to puke.

I scanned the party for a potential paramour: nope, nope, maybe, definitely not…maybe. Yeah maybe. Let’s call him Maybe. Maybe would do.

I made eye contact and took a sip of the volatile, Chernobyl-piss gold concoction I clutched in my red Solo cup and two-stepped my way to “Crazy” as I crossed the room. He smiled back. Yes! I was gonna get laid.

We didn’t make small talk, we just keep dancing and leering at each other in what we thought were sexy eyes.

“You wanna go back to my place?” He grinned.

“Yeah, if we’re gonna fuck at your place?” I chimed.

“Absolutely!” He responded.

“Do you live close-by?”

“Just around the corner.”

“Who do you live with?”

“My roommate, but he’s out for the night.” He replied.

“Excellent.”

He grabbed me by the waist and kissed me deeply, pressing my body against his. I could feel his warm erection against my thigh...

I didn’t get his name and he didn’t ask for mine. We were just two consenting adults on the verge of fucking our brains out. Or so I thought.

We left the party arm-in-arm, and still clutching our Solo cups. I stopped to whisper to my friend that I’d text her when we got to his place. She winked and raised her red plastic cup high in the air: our union was now blessed.

The only sounds we made were from the cadence of our footsteps hitting the concrete, punctuated by the swirling of ice in our cups as we took the occasional sip. A Peruvian Pepper tree a few steps ahead had established its dominance by uprooting a section of the sidewalk as if to say, (please clap on each syllable), “Fuck. Your. Shit, humans!” Maybe made short work of jumping over the obstacle, outstretched his hand to me, and helped guide me over. Points.

We finally reached his apartment building, he unlocked the door, and I entered, scanning for any signs of fuckery. Did I see anything out of place? Nope: Couch, table, TV, and video game console, etc. Pass. Did I hear any strange noises? Nope: Just the hum of the refrigerator. Pass.

“My room’s just here,” he said as he unlocked his door.

Points. No one would walk-in on us.

The door creaked open in an almost comical fashion. He stepped aside and gestured, ever the gentleman, and I scanned his room again. The usual college wares with an en-suite. It was very clean, but not sterile. It was more of a, “I’m going to bring someone home tonight,” kind of clean. Thank you, Sir.

He locked the door behind us, threw his keys on his desk, and took my purse and my drink to set it down beside his. As I’m writing this now, the first few wah-wah notes of “Let’s Get It On,” are playing in my head. You know the, “Wah, wah, wah wownh..” Yeah, not so much.

He grabbed me by the waist and kissed me deeply, pressing my body against his. I could feel his erection against my thigh and my Gingersnap starts throbbing just writing about it. He was a great kisser.

We stumbled over to the bed, he helped me on to it and guided my head to the pillow without breaking the kiss. This was going to be good. Or…well, you know where this is going.

He ground his pounding cock into my thigh and began rubbing my breasts through my dress. He then trailed one hand down under the hem, then squeezed my leg to the rhythm of his grinding as he made his way to my panties and my moist core.

Photo by Eugene Chystiakov on Unsplash

“Ummmm,” he hummed into my ear when he found what he was looking for.

“Hold on, I’ve got a condom,” I said while retrieving the one I had tucked into my bra.

“Cool…But can I taste you first?”

Uhh, is a pig’s ass pork?! I nodded and he helped me sit up and we both undressed. He guided my head back to the pillow once more and I bit my lip and squeezed my eyes shut in anticipation of what was going to be…oh. Oh, dear.

…too much tongue — kind of like the Cookie Monster freebasing a pack of Oreos vs. Audrey Hepburn savoring a Macaron.

I had to fart. Fuck.

I remember staring at the ceiling wondering how the hell I was going to get out of this one while unceremoniously clenching my asshole. One wrong move and the ghost of an Animal-Style Double-Double would blow his fucking face off.

“Hey, come up here I want you to fuck me.”

He sat up and kind of wobbled. Shit. We both looked down at his penis, only to find it had decided to take a nap.

“Woop. Guess I had too much; he’ll come back.” He slurred.

“OK, cool. I’m gonna run to the bathroom real quick.”

He winked and did double guns with his fingers, signaling that any chance of good sex was not to be had. I got up, ran into the bathroom, quickly shut the door behind me, turned on the faucet, and barely made it to the toilet. I slowly let out the world’s longest fart as I imagine a Ninja would do while examining the bathroom. There was a bottle of men’s body wash in gunmetal gray with a loofah to match, extra rolls of toilet paper, neatly folded towels, and a medium-sized window over the shower/tub combo.

I finished my business, rinsed and dried, then returned to the bedroom to find him, yup, snoring away.

“Ok, well, I guess I’ll go to sleep and we can have a sesh in the morning,” I thought.

Wrong. He stirred.

“Umm, you want more?”

I’m sure I just shrugged at this point. He went to work and I tried to enjoy it, but it was just awful. Not enough force, too much tongue — kind of like the Cookie Monster freebasing a pack of Oreos vs. Audrey Hepburn savoring a Macaron. Does that make sense? Anyway, it was shit. At this point, I just wanted to go to sleep and attempt to ride the last evaporating wafts of buzz from my drink.

I tapped him on the head.

“Hey, come up here.”

He stopped what he was doing then sloppily positioned himself over me and leaned in for a kiss. Christ! This motherfucker was glistening. Was he eating a donut down there? He certainly looked like one with his glistening-ass. I just pushed him off of me and he kind of rolled into bed beside me.

I don’t care if it’s my pussy juice; I’ll thank you not to get it on my face.

The next few hours went something like this:

Me: [moves]

Maybe: “You want more baby?”

Me: [screams internally; stops moving entirely]

Maybe: …

Me: …

Me: [breathes]

Maybe: “I’m gonna make you scream,” then proceeds to go down on me for the fifth time.

I begin planning my escape as Maybe gayfully laps away.

“I have to wait until he falls asleep again…” Lick, lick, lick…

“Oh shit, but he’ll hear me open the door…” Slurp, slurp, slurp…

“THE BATHROOM WINDOW!”

Salvation.

I let him carry on for another minute or two before suggesting he get some rest. It was very dark now, and it felt like the drum beats from all the parties raging in the near distance were egging me on.

“Get up…get up…GET UP!”

I carefully shifted my weight, placed my feet on the floor, and got up without disturbing the buoyancy of the mattress as much as possible. I gathered my clothes in one scoop and padded for the bathroom.

“Shit! My purse!”

Photo by Vlad Kutepov on Unsplash

I had to make a u-turn. I held my breath as I tip-toed naked across his bedroom floor with my clothes bundled under my arm. He stirred, I became a beautiful statue. I didn’t even blink. He rolled onto his back and started snoring. I watched him as I slowly extended my arm and reached for…my cup. I took a sip while still watching him. Yuck, it was warm now, but if he woke up I could drop my clothes and act like I wanted a drink. I set the cup back down, picked up my purse, and returned to my trek to the bathroom.

“Fuck! That’s the closet. How did I get turned around?”

I returned to my trek to the bathroom on the OTHER side of the room.

I called on a skill many of us perfected in childhood: the silent opening and closing of doors and cupboards to retrieve snacks. I made quick work of getting dressed, texted my friend that I was alright, and sized-up the window.

I could fit, and we were on the first floor but it would still be a bit of a drop and hard to maneuver in a dress. I moved the body wash to get some footing then quietly opened the window only to let in the thumping music from all the parties. I froze. I didn’t hear anything, so I dropped my shoes out the window just as a car full of girls loudly singing and playing “London Bridge,” drove by.

I remember the damp smell of the Pepper trees and how cool the air felt against my stupid, stupid face as I clung to the base of the open window now dispossessed of my fucking shoes.

“Hey,” came a knock on the door.

“Your purse and your clothes are gone. You’re not trying to sneak out on me are you?”

Aww, poor Maybe. Yes. Yes, I was.

“No. No, I just got cold and started my period. I’ll be out in a sec.”

Fuck. I closed the window. Put the body wash back in its place and just sat on the toilet wondering what my mom would do in this situation. Lie. She would definitely lie, so I was good. I flushed, washed my hands, and climbed back into bed after reluctantly setting my purse down on the nightstand. He wrapped his arm around me. Great. So now I wasn’t going to get any sleep either because no one can actually sleep this way unless they’re drunk af.

Finally, the morning came. To be honest, I’m glad something did. I sat up in bed and he woke with a smile.

“You wanna try again?”

I looked down at his glorious, rock-hard penis that could have easily been the model for any ancient Fascinus. I bit my lip.

“Oh wait, you started your period. Damn.”

Photo by Maria Teneva on Unsplash

Damn indeed. He offered to give me a ride home and I excused myself to make a phone call outside to secretly retrieve my shoes. If he noticed I left without them and came back with them (they were still there; phew!), he didn’t let on at all.

He drove me to my apartment in silence, I gave him my number, and he never called. I guess he did notice.