Pregnancy and motherhood is an especially vulnerable position for women with their doctors. I couldn’t fully grasp that reality until I became a mom myself. Like many women, I felt uncomfortably constrained by my lack of choice or input in my labor and delivery.

Because I had severe preeclampsia, I had to be induced five weeks early. Despite giving birth in a certified “baby friendly” hospital, I was also denied my request for tubal ligation because I “might get remarried one day to a husband who wants more kids.”

When I pressed my OBGYN further, he said it was never going to happen in a Catholic hospital.

My water was manually broken too early, before my cervix was “ripe.” I had to argue to get an epidural, and my induced labor lasted 38 hours. Then, I was chastised for not making enough milk for my preemie even though it takes about four days for a first time mother’s milk to come in.

I met my daughter’s first pediatrician at her fourth week checkup, and I was put off by the way he ignored my concerns. We had a lot of struggles with breastfeeding — she had GERD and colic. When I asked him about tongue tie, he immediately dismissed me without actually examining her tongue.

“You’re just a nervous new mom,” he said, though he didn’t sound too kind about it. Every time we saw this doctor, I felt so stupid and small. He and my daughter’s father shared these knowing looks with each other like I was an idiot.

Months later, because my daughter and I moved from Tennessee to Minnesota, I had to take her to a new pediatrician. It was an “okay” experience, until they made us wait 45 minutes after the doctor left to finally administer her damn shots. I was mad. We had to wait in a stuffy exam room so that my daughter was was antsy and upset by the time they finally got around to the shots. Injections are hard enough on moms and babies without waiting for the child to end up in a terrible mood first.

That’s when I decided to look for a new pediatrician. I found one in the Twin Cities who allowed parents to choose an alternative vaccine schedule. We wound up doing one injection per appointment, always according to the doctor’s recommendation, and without the stress of the former pediatrician offices.

I loved the new pediatrician because he never treated me like a stupid new mom. After seeing him for several months, and working with him on some skills regression in my daughter, I finally felt brave enough to bring up tongue tie again.

“I think she can stick her tongue out fine,” I explained. “But I don’t think she can lift her tongue up. I’m wondering if that’s not affecting her other issues like GERD and her oral regression.”

Unlike the previous doctor, this one heard me out, and examined her tongue properly.

“Well, mom, you should listen to your instincts because I think you hit the nail on the head.”

He referred us to a pediatric dentist who could perform a frenectomy to free up her tongue.

My daughter’s father didn’t understand, however. He asked how I could question an expert, the first pediatrician, when I have no medical degree. But I’m our daughter’s primary caretaker and besides attending a few early pediatrician appointments her dad was not engaged. He didn’t know what I was going through when she quit making progress on her language and eating skills. He wasn’t up with her through colic and GERD.

As much as everybody tells moms to quit turning to “Doctor Google,” if I hadn’t kept looking up her symptoms I might have never figured it out.

About a month before my daughter’s second birthday, the pediatric dentist diagnosed her with a posterior tongue tie (one of the most difficult types, though hardly impossible, to detect). She had a quick laser surgery to free the frenulum, and then spent six months in speech and occupational therapy to work on her muscle memory.

I was so grateful to finally have the right doctors on our side, but the hospital completely missed her tongue tie, despite her failure to properly latch. And her first pediatrician completely missed the growing symptoms of a real problem that impacted our quality of life and my baby’s development.

At that point, I lost even more trust in the medical community.