Photo by Morgan Petroski on Unsplash

I had a debate with a girlfriend the other day (over FaceTime because of social distancing, of course) about the merits of a long workout versus a short workout. We’ve had this debate before with each other and we have fallen on both sides before. Depending on where I am in my life, I have been a vicious proponent of the short workout, giving my all in those quick bursts of twenty minutes and then hustling off to the next thing on my schedule.

There’s a ton of science that lays out the benefits of short workouts including the very important benefit of fewer risks of injury due to overexertion. The Internet is littered with articles about what happens to your body during a shorter, high-intensity workout as compared to a longer workout.

This is not going to be one of those articles.

I really don’t care what the science says on this particular topic because, at this point in my life, I am the person who seeks out and finds a way to get that extra-long workout no matter what. I do it not because I believe I’m burning a significant amount of additional calories but because I’m pretty sure I’m addicted to that endorphin high.

I love doing highly structured, intensive, long-winded workouts.

Just today I did a three-hour intensive workout cobbled together of all my favorite exercise classes and their COVID-19 virtual content. At the start of the routine, I did an hour and a half virtual martial arts class, then a forty-five-minute spin class from the Peloton app, and finished with a forty-five-minute yoga class, also from the Peloton app. I told my partner it was my little mini-triathlon and then giggled to myself about how ridiculous I am to put myself through this for literally no reason. He doesn’t always think I’m funny.

My muscles hurt, I might have thought about crying at one point, and tomorrow I’ll hurt in places I wish I didn’t know exist. I didn’t perform at peak spin class levels while on the bike and I seriously considered allowing myself to fall asleep during the yoga, but I loved it anyway.

Why did I do this to myself?

Because it was fun and it was a challenge. I’ll probably do it again in a couple of weeks when my legs stop threatening to give out every time I stand up. It probably wasn’t the most efficient way for me to do any of those workouts but there’s also a big chunk of data on my Fitbit app that I’m also really proud of.

I sent that workout to my friend and she sent me back her twenty-minute chunk from this morning. And then again after lunch. And again after dinner. All equally good and, for her, equally as rewarding as my ridiculous session.

Whatever gets you moving, do it. And don’t worry so much about am I working out the correct amount of time? Workout with the time you have and make time for the workout you want. If you have to literally pencil in that three-hour run you’ve been itching to do or the long swim or the long day of weights, do it. I’ve turned done social requests before because I’d been planning a crazy workout for months and was determined to get it done.

Exercise is all about the exercise you do. Even if it does hurt like hell tomorrow. Sometimes the aches and pains are the best part.