Is Running Away Ever a Good Thing?

The art of escapism

Photo by Darren Lawrence on Unsplash

I never ran away from home as a kid. My childhood was far from perfect, but I wasn’t quite desperate enough to tie my things in a towel and head for the highway. I preferred the problems I had to whatever scariness lay beyond.

Then I grew up.

You could say I have spent the majority of my brief adulthood mid-stride. After living up through college in the same small town, I was suffocating. I had been planning my escape for two years by the time I graduated, and after the ceremony, I promptly packed up my belongings and bought a one-way ticket to Barcelona, Spain.

That was the moment I became a runaway — though I didn’t know it yet.

The Art of Escapism

People love to ask those who have made big changes like moving or traveling if they’re “running away.”

I always answered those questions with a resounding “no.” After all, when I moved to Barcelona, I left my home country in pretty good shape: stable relationships with friends and family, few enemies, good terms with the ex-boss. All my bridges were intact.

But I was wrong. Of course I was running away.

I left behind debt, dissatisfaction with my job, frustration with the state of the country, frustration with myself for not being the way I wanted to be, anxiety about my relationships with my friends, insecurity about myself, fear of living a “normal” life… the list goes on.

I just couldn’t see past the negative connotation that goes with the idea of running away. I wanted to believe I was consciously and responsibly changing my life, not practicing some form of naive escapism.

But in reality, I was doing both.

Escaping isn’t always a bad thing, and can actually be beneficial — under certain circumstances.

When Life Gets Too Tough

Photo by Aarón Blanco Tejedor on Unsplash

Everyone seeks an escape at some level. And we need it. Otherwise, the stress would be too much.

Take travel, for instance. One study proved what we all already know: that occasional travel, even long-weekends away, improved stress levels in participants up to 45 days after the vacation.

However, travel is rarely the perfect escape we expect it to be. Instead, travel is often an experience.

Where escape implies absence, experience means action, endurance, confrontation. Unless you’re taking a Carnival Cruise (and sometimes, even then) your trip will be an experience. It will likely have good and bad, and this is a fact you can’t really avoid.

But it isn’t just major life choices that can disguise themselves as escapes.

We escape all day, every day, right in the comfort of our own couches. We spend hours on social media, or binge-watching true-crime series. Even healthy activities like working out and meal-prepping can be escapes. For some, their career is an escape from the dullness of domestic life. For others, home life is an escape from a stressful career.

As good as distractions might feel, the respite is temporary. Fill your time trying to escape real life and you’ll always be on the run, seeking the next getaway, chased by deadlines and bills and people you’ve hurt.

When You Need to Heal

Photo by averie woodard on Unsplash

Sometimes, we find ourselves in such desperate (or unhealthy) situations that we are left with little choice but to make a change.

This is how I felt when I left the States. My attitude and mentality, especially towards myself, was a mess. I knew I had to change something in order to fix myself. I just happened to choose one of the biggest changes a person can make.

Change is 100% a good thing. It opens up the possibility for adaptation, which might be difficult, but is essential to live a happy life.

Even tragedy can do this.

One of my favorite stories I’ve read on the internet is about a moving company who helps women move from their abusive partners — for free.

Sometimes, when faced with the choice to stay in a situation or do something drastic to escape, the safest option is the latter.

When You Need Some Space

Photo by Tom Ezzatkhah on Unsplash

I wanted Barcelona to be my utopia. It wasn’t.

After about a year of waffling, making few changes, and falling into old habits, I wasn’t growing the way I intended to. I wasn’t doing the real work I needed to because work is hard, especially self-work.

However, I still credit my decision to move with changing my life.

Eventually, I began to do the real, tough, uncomfortable, impossible self-work. I apologized to people I had hurt in the past, even if it meant kicking my pride to the curb (ouch) and admitting the embarrassing flaws I’d always tried to cover up.

I changed my routine and worked my ass off cutting out anything that wasn’t beneficial. I drank less. Smoked less. Bought more veggies. Listened harder. Went on walks. Went on runs. Left the bar early. Sat in the feeling of discomfort until it ate me alive.

So, no, Barcelona was far from a utopia. But moving provided me with clarity. With the dirt and grime of attachments and worries from my “old life” wiped away, I could finally see myself clearly. For the first time, I knew what I needed to change — and how to make those changes.

I had reached my limit on growth in my old world. Making the change to a new place and a new life gave me the space to grow again.