A few years ago, it seemed like everyone was eating ass.

At least, everyone was talking about it. This really taboo act that was too dirty to ever mention was being discussed in places you wouldn’t expect it to.

Rimming was having its day and it was really awesome to see so many people celebrating the naughty stuff they were into.

Since then, it feels like a few sex acts have had their moments in the sun, where people are doing their part to normalize them.

But the tone is different this time.

Instead of being a lot of upbeat, positive discussion about embracing your turn-ons, there’s been a lot of people looking down on others for their turn-offs.

Instead of just celebrating certain sex acts, they’re being treated as compulsory.

I started noticing it with period sex and pegging.

Those aren’t things I’m into personally, but I read about them eagerly because I want to find out what the hype is all about.

And I was really disappointed because I kept encountering a lot of shaming, like there was something wrong with anyone who wasn’t into those things.

Most of it was directed at men. If they weren’t into fucking their lady on her period or taking it in the ass, it’s because they weren’t man enough to do it, they were pussies, or their sexual preferences were just internalized mysoginy or homphobia.

That, or they were just bad lovers who didn’t know how to enjoy sex.

By now we all know that we’re not supposed to yuck anyone’s yums. But I think we’ve overcorrected here because now I keep running across articles that yuck people’s yucks. And that’s not cool, either.

Encouragement Without Pressure

I feel like I’m on thin ice writing about this, because I’ve written about making yourself love sex acts that you’re not fully into.

I’ve done this by flooding myself.

It’s how I learned to love giving head, how I got into enjoying anal, and how to rewire my sexual preferences.

I still think that’s a legit thing to do. I have zero regrets about flooding myself the way I did.

And I think it’s great if someone would want to flood themselves into enjoying things like period sex and pegging.

But I also think there’s a fine and important line between teaching yourself to get turned on by something and feeling pressured to do it.

There’s nothing wrong with encouraging people to try something, normalizing and endorsing it, or giving advice on how to enjoy it more.

That’s the approach I try to take in those articles. Because sometimes you’re turned on by the thought of something and you want a little help making that fantasy a reality. Or you might be into the thought of giving your partner something they desire, but only if you can get to the point of desiring it too. Or there might be a lot of things that turn you on about a particular sex act and you just need to get over the parts of it that make you a bit squeamish.

It’s never about shame. It’s never meant to tell anyone they need to get into sex acts they don’t find appealing at all. And it’s definitely not about making them feel less than because they’re turned off by them.

A Few Things That Don’t Get Me Off

Part of the reason I can’t get down with shaming people is that I know what it’s like to be on the receiving end of that shame.

I spent a long part of my life hating blowjobs.

There were a lot of reasons for that. I had some trauma around it thanks to a boyfriend who would pressure me to swallow.

My libido was really low for medical reasons, so it was hard for me to get into any sex act that didn’t give me any physical stimulation. I was also in a weird place in my marriage — I just wasn’t all that excited about sex, so giving head just felt like a chore.

And on top of that, I hadn’t figured out the right technique yet. Every blowjob just made my jaw feel sore and my lips feel stretched.

I made it clear to my husband that I wouldn’t be going down on him anymore. I tried to own it as best as I could. But a part of me always felt like a fuck up. I would’ve been embarrassed for others to find out that I had become the boring girl who won’t even blow her husband.

I could just imagine other people thinking how terrible it must be to fuck me, if I wasn’t even willing to do something as basic as give a little head.

No one actively shamed me for it. No one even found out until I wrote about it. But it was still a shitty feeling.

So, as much as I love certain sex acts with all my heart, I can’t bring myself to shame anyone for not being into them. Because no one should have to feel like shit for their turn-offs.

I’ve managed to make peace with the things I’m not turned on by, but I still feel a little embarrassed admitting them sometimes because I feel like people might look down on me or think I’m hung up or uptight.

So, I decided to lay some of those out here.

Period sex is one of them.

This is often framed as something that men are too squeamish to do. That’s not the case in my relationship. My husband is fine with period sex. It’s me that’s not interested.

I’m really icked out by blood, even if it’s my own. That makes it hard for me to enjoy period sex. Feeling desirable, attractive, and good about myself is crucial to my enjoyment of sex, and I had a hard time feeling that way when I was on my period.

I usually get pretty horny around that time, but that hasn’t been enough to push me back into it. I like the buildup of anticipation. It’s a really nice feeling to spend a few days just waiting to get fucked, getting tantalizingly close and intimate with my husband and knowing I have to wait is hot in its own way.

Plus, I have my shower head to hold me over.

Another one is pegging.

This is one my husband isn’t interested in trying, and I’m not interested in doing to him. And it’s for the same reason: to both of us, it reads as a submissive act.

I need a very clear power relation to get turned on. I find it hot when a man is dominant and when a woman is submissive. Pegging inverts that dynamic in a way that just doesn’t do anything for me.

I’m sure it doesn’t have to be a submissive act. There are probably plenty of men who can make getting pegged a dominant act — just like some women can dom while getting fucked. But it still doesn’t really do it for me — I have no interest in pegging someone and I don’t imagine I’d enjoy it all that much if I tried.

I eventually came around on blowjobs — big time. I get turned on by them now, and I love giving head when I’m really in the mood.

That’s been a big achievement for me. But I’ve emerged from my blowjobless years to discover that there are a lot of guys now who expect blowjobs to include throat action.

That’s a big no go for me. Even if it makes me a plain Jane cocksucker, I still can’t get into it. Not even conceptually. Any porn that involves gagging instantly turns me off — which is a lot of it, so I end up doing a lot of skipping.

I’ve also seen complaints about women who don’t swallow, even going so far as to say that it’s rude, disrespectful, awkward, or unfair not to do it. But that’s just not me, either.

Unlike deepthroating, I actually find the idea of swallowing really hot.

I love it in porn. Some of my blowjob fantasies end with my mouth filled with come, and either letting it flow out from my lips or swallowing it all down.

But it’s the texture. I’m really sensitive to textures and tastes when it comes to food and I can get disgusted by them very easily.

Sadly, it’s the same with come. I’ve had it in my mouth exactly twice in my life, and that’s been more than enough for me.

I’m also not into foot stuff.

Now, I haven’t actually read any articles about guys being wimps because they won’t fuck your feet, or women being prudes because they won’t lube up their toes for a bit of fun. But I’m calling it. If porn is any indication (and it usually is), foot play is about to have its moment.

And I’m here for it, but I’ll be doing all my cheering from the sidelines.

To me, there’s just nothing sexually or visually appealing about feet. I don’t find them erotic or arousing.

So, the whole foot fetish thing is something I just don’t get.

Those who do, yes, go for it. Fuck those feet as hard as you want. But I’ll still be leaving my socks on during sex.

Deal Breakers Are Fine — Shame Isn’t

Everyone has their deal breakers when it comes to sex.

I don’t know that I could be with someone who didn’t eat pussy and still have a very satisfying sex life. Oral gives me some of my strongest orgasms, and I miss it when I don’t get it.

I’m not sure I could have any serious chemistry with a guy who was thoroughly submissive. My idea of good sex involves me being the little spoon and having me be taken care of. I don’t know what I’d do if I was fucking a submissive guy, but I definitely think I’d struggle.

And I might feel like I’m missing out if I was with a partner who didn’t like giving anal, didn’t talk dirty to me, and didn’t know how to gently make me submit to them.

Some sex acts are deal breakers for me. Others are nice-to-haves. But that doesn’t mean I think they’re essential for everyone.

If not fucking on your period is a deal breaker for you, make it a deal breaker. But couples who are perfectly happy not having sex during that time of the month can just enjoy their cuddle time and there’s no reason to look down on them for it.

And yeah, if you’re a guy who doesn’t eat pussy, you might have a hard time finding a lady who is satisfied with that. But if you meet a gal who can live without it and can’t get enough of the other stuff you give to her, more power to both of you.

I loved all the ass eating conversations people were having a while ago. Not because getting my ass eaten is my favorite sex act or anything like that, but because it meant we were tearing down a lot of the shame around sex — even the really dirty, taboo stuff.

Now, it feels like shame is making a comeback.

And that’s one big step backwards.

Not being turned on by something isn’t necessarily a sign that someone is immature or unadventurous. For the most part, our feelings about the kinds of sex we’re not interested in are complex. They can be hard to untangle and understand. They can come from our past experiences. They might even be pure and simple gut feelings.

They’re not exactly choices, though. Even if it’s sometimes possible to flood yourself or learn to see the pleasure in something, by and large we don’t choose what we find hot or have a say in the things that turn us off. They just do.

It should be simple. Love what you love. Keep some things off the table if you want. But there’s no reason to be ashamed of our desires.

If we can embrace what turns us on and accept what turns us off, we’ll be able to enjoy sex for what it should be: positive, exciting, intimate, loving, comforting, and really fucking pleasurable.