Alibaba’s internationalization route, by contrast, is more shaped around M&A. While Taobao has launched an international version, most of its expansion has come from buying successful players such as Lazada and RedMart in Southeast Asia. By slowly buying up the emerging winners, and integrating them with the Alibaba infrastructure (payments, logistics, messaging, finance, etc.), they are expanding their reach.

Both tech giants though, when comparing their home market revenue with their international revenue, still cannot be said to have successfully internationalized. It is also clear that their core focus remains the Chinese market, as they keep building out their dominance, cooperating with the government on many initiatives and taking advantage of local opportunities only market-dominant companies enjoy. The incentive to go all-in on internationalization is simply not there.

What Chinese Startups Are Up To Today

The expansion of current startups looking to scale globally looks quite different from Alibaba and Tencent. With their products being fully software-based, which allows them to come from everywhere and be distributed to anywhere, most are opting for high degrees of localization.

This often goes so far that users cannot tell, whether the company behind the product they are using is Chinese or Western.

The most popular search term suggested by Google when looking up Hangzhou-based Club Factory is, “Which country owns Club Factory?”.

One of the most successful Chinese companies to gain global traction is Bytedance, whose TikTok app has been a hit worldwide. They run a variety of different versions of applications targeting local tastes and are very quick to iterate — a strength of China’s current crop of tech startups, which carry agility in their DNA.

Try fast, fail fast, learn fast and double down on what works. This recipe has been the core of Chinese innovation from the very beginning, much more so than in the West, where it is similarly preached but less practiced. Chinese companies can adapt exponentially in very short time periods.

This quick-try mindset, combined with the willingness of the current startup generation to really look at a market and localize for it, has led many to succeed over local counterparts, which often start at an advantage.

Looking at the landscape in Indonesia, Vietnam or Malaysia, for example, it is impressive how many Chinese technology companies are providing many of the popular services running there today.

The Ecosystem Approach

Another interesting strategy, which Chinese startups are pursuing regularly, is to apply the same techniques that worked for them in China to the ecosystem abroad.

Rather than buying foreign competitors outright, they acquire a sizable stake, start to mentor them and, in certain aspects, make their platforms interoperable.

This strategy is explained best with Didi, which has invested in Grab and Careem, as well as merged with Uber locally, taking a stake in the global Uber holding company along the way. Instead of trying to build up their operations, which is often tedious in foreign markets, they prioritize investment in the winning ecosystem on a global scale.