The ‘two types of girls’ phenomena can be summarized as the pretty girl v. the plain girl; the cool girl v. the weird girl; the comfy girl v. try-hard girl.

Without trying, without even using words, the Internet found a way to label girls and pit them against one another. And the reasons this is so damaging are endless: they treat girls like they need to compare themselves; they suggest who you choose to be for a day or even a moment defines who you are; and each image carries an assumption of a label that becomes several sub-labels.

Take the party girl . You’ve seen her, probably next to someone not dressed for going out to emphasize how different the two are. She’s in a dress and heels, makeup done, drink in hand. You need only look at her picture for a second to label her ‘the party girl’. But do you leave it at that? Or do you immediately assume a few other things? That she drinks too much, that she’s a slut, that she isn’t smart, that she’s irresponsible, that she’s in an impeccably good mood unless she’s just been dumped because she’s too naive to see what’s going on in the world.

On the opposite side of the spectrum, take the weird girl. A staple of teen movies and tv shows everywhere, the weird girl is seen in opposition of the ‘basic’ girl, because girls can absolutely never win. The weird girl label brings about its own set of assumptions. She’s obsessed with some obscure band or author, she’s lazy and more interested in eating than drinking, she’s shy, awkward, probably a virgin, and an ugly duckling that could be beautiful if only she tried to do her makeup and cared a little about her wardrobe.

If she likes tv shows and fandom, she’s a nerd (or worse, a fake nerd girl). If she likes relationships and sex, she’s a thot. It doesn’t matter what a girl is interested in or how complex her personality really is; she is inevitably going to be called out and labelled for something that she likes.

To illustrate my point, let’s look at a label trend that lasted roughly the duration of 2019- the VSCO girl. A “VSCO girl” wears t-shirts long enough to cover her shorts and her hair in a scrunchie. She has white Vans and a Hydroflask water bottle. They use a photo-editing app called VSCO to make their perfectly framed, perfectly staged, perfectly taken photos look even better. They are teenaged girls for FRICKS sake. So what if they want to take a photo that looks like this…

My sister’s account, used with her permission

The “VSCO girl” trend began because the Internet can never just let girls be girls; they have to find fault in what they’re doing. One article describes a mother who desperately wants to save her daughter from becoming a VSCO girl. Another article by Seventeen seems to have a positive take on the trend, explaining how they’ve taken over Instagram and what you need to be one; but in the same breath publishes an article about the only 5 outfits you’ll see a VSCO girl wear. One of the few articles interested in exploring the implications of the “VSCO girl” trend and label even goes ahead to explain that the labels come in part from an adult obsession over teenage girls.What is with everyone’s fascination with teenage girls? They already have to feel scrutinized by their peers and boys their own age, now they have to take it from adults as well?

The damage of the VSCO girl is done. Rebecca Jennings from Vox, who explored what the world sees when they look at a VSCO girl, tells it better than I could.

“Usually, we point [VSCO girls] out to each other when we see them, and we might laugh at them a little bit, just because they’re so conformist,” one 15-year-old told Slate. Another described them as “They’re just kind of basic and not that interesting as people.” This, essentially, is the effect of labeling people at all; any high school dramedy will tell you as much. Like the “basic” girls of the mid to early 2010s, the VSCO girl label slaps any teenager with an oversized T-shirt and a scrunchie with a dozen other signifiers that may or may not apply to her: That she’s vapid and boring, that she’s too concerned with how her pictures look even though they look just like everybody else’s, and that in trying so hard to not look like she’s trying, she becomes the biggest try-hard of all. And like most stereotypes about women, you can’t really win.

The VSCO girl trend seems to have died, probably in no small part due to TikToks making fun of them, the criticism of their peers, and the general dismissal the title brought them. All because some girls wanted to make their photos look good in a world that only wants photos that look good.

For as long as we’ve had the Internet, people seem obsessed with labelling and making fun of girls for the things they like. Who can forget the “basic girl” label that to this day has inspire thousands of memes and instructional guides on how not be ‘basic’. An entire generation of middle and high school girls got shamed for everything from their music taste to their shoe choices to their coffee order. All because Starbucks produced a drink teenage girls liked. Why shouldn’t they be allowed to like pumpkin spice lattes? They’re delicious. More importantly, there were reasons all those things became popular. UGGS were comfy and warm. Iphones are convenient. Leggings and jeans go with everything. Taylor Swift hits every area of human emotion in ways girls can relate to and in a vocal range they can reach. But as soon as the rest of the world gets wind that young women and teenage girls like something, they just have to fault it for the fact that… young women and teenage girls like it?

Once, the word hysteria was used to describe the catchall diagnosis given to women rather than diagnose actual cases of anxiety, depression, irritability, or feminism. Today it is still used in the last sense. When women took to the street on the March 8th #DayWithoutWomen, those against the protest in the media and in their lives describes the women as “crazy”, “rabid feminists”, and referred to their actions as “hysterics and tantrums”. If it’s a dirty move for a man to defend his actions by calling his (ex)/girlfriend “crazy”, it is a dirtier one to refer to a legion of women as “hysterical”.

Hysteria, however, is often exactly the word used when teenage girls express joy over something. Teenage girls will line up for hours to see their favorite movie, most likely excitedly chatting with one another or rereading the book it was adapted from up until the very last moment. Why? Because they can, and because it’s fun to see other people and build up excitement for something you love. Or they may go nuts over seeing a band play live or hearing an announcement from their favorite actor. After attending a One Direction concert, Jonathan Heaf wrote for GQ that boy bands “turn a butter-wouldn’t-melt teenage girl into a rabid, knicker-wetting banshee who will tear off her own ears in hysterical fervour when presented with the objects of her fascinations.” A pretty offensive criticism.

Bailey Poland, who made the connection between this treatment of teenage girls and the 19th-20th ce. attitudes about hysteria, argued against this.

“There’s an underlying assumption that teen girls are not in control of their emotions or interests and become overly excited or upset for no reason,” she said. “When the reality is that teen girls are often very intentional about what they’re interested in and aware of the social influences behind those media products, and they deliberately use excitement and passion as the foundation for community-building and empathetic development.”

Stephanie Meyer, John Green, and Sarah Dessen all write for teenage girls, successfully. Boy bands like One Direction, Jonas Brothers, and 5 Seonds of Summer are playing and writing for a target market of girls and young women. Yet girls are criticized for liking these things. They are labeled a Twi-hard(or Twi-mom, because adult women are also mocked for liking things), or a Directioner, and with that label they are dismissed from any deeper consideration.

(I personally didn’t like Twilight. In fact, I was anti-Twilight. But one day I realized I had spent years of my life obsessing over something that gave me no joy just to bring down the people it did bring joy to. And in that moment, I realized how shitty I’d been to my friends, and how much time I’d wasted on negative thoughts.)

In case the very deep-seeded sexism wasn’t obvious, I want to take a moment that no one treats boys who act the same way like this. They’ll camp for hours to get new shoes or a video game, they go and see the same crappy action movie produced again and again, and all the stories I’ve heard of violent destruction happening because someone lost at a game have been the results of male emotions. But not only are these ‘safe spaces’ for boys to express themselves, they’ve pretty typically barred women from the entrances.

The Internet provides an amazing place for girls to express themselves, to delve into their new interests, and to find others with the same tastes. In the height of the Twilight craze, a joke website ‘My Life is Twilight’ existed for girls to demonstrate their passion. It was invaded by trolls and mocked to the death. VSCO was supposed to be the platform that was a “chiller, more creative counterpart to Instagram, free of bullying or anxiety or “compare culture.”” Media bias (led by people who just want to criticize Gen-Z) → VSCO girls being seen as a bad thing → their own peers on TikTok killed them off.

As long as we find ways to label and deride girls and women for the things they like, they only safety they have in pursuing these things is in masses, and those masses will by mislabeled as mobs. Women will be forced to downplay their interest in feminine things to be taken seriously, and young girls will be invalidated for liking the things meant to appeal to them. So next time you want to dismiss someone as a fangirl, Insta-famous, or fake, maybe just consider everything you’re assuming about them. And then maybe just stay quiet.