It’s clear we live in a world where bad things happen. There’s no point pretending it’s not true since you can’t escape reality. Nonetheless, you might want to think again if you believe light-hearted people are naive and don’t recognize what categorically matters in the world.

Unless you can shake off difficult times with a few words of positivity, most likely, you find your mood plummets when unforeseen events make life hard. And there’s always a few do-gooders around, ready to suggest you paint on a smile and focus on good things rather than what ails you.

You know, on one level, they are right. It doesn’t help to concentrate on problems. Doing so only reminds you why you’re blue and consolidates your fears. But you can’t help wondering whether the bright spark with a positive attitude in front of you is guileless. After all, can’t they see the world’s falling apart?

Deep down, you ponder whether the individual who wants you to smell the roses more often and chant affirmations lives in Cloud Cuckoo Land rather than on planet Earth with the rest of us.

Light-hearted people, however, have a valid method for shifting their mindset and getting feel-good chemical production to flow. Their good-natured pleasantness amid times of gloom might seem to buck against reality, but it works.

True naivety stems from an inability to recognize facts and see life with clarity. Light-heartedness, though, tells despondency and despair to back off because you refuse to let it take control of your well-being.

How to be more light-hearted

You can’t embrace a carefree outlook until you disengage from the idea you, and events that have an impact on you, are important. Of course, on one level, they genuinely are significant. On another, however, they are fleeting and inconsequential.

The time to note life’s significance is when you have the power to embark on positive change. If events are negative, and you can improve them, it’s helpful to immerse yourself in constructive measures.

Those times when you are powerless to make changes, but reflect on their importance until stress threatens to pull you apart, though, are merciless harbingers of depression.

Being more light-hearted doesn’t mean you pretend catastrophic events don’t take place. Rather, you stop pouring energy into aspects of them in which you are powerless.

So, if unwanted events happen, a light-hearted person makes the best of them. They don’t worry about what they want to do, but can’t accomplish. They focus on whatever they can do to make life more reasonable.

We can see an example of such a practice in The Odyssey, a movie about the life of Jacques Cousteau. There’s a scene in which Cousteau has lost one of his sons in a plane crash and is in a dark place emotionally. His remaining son reminds him of the time when he and his brother were boys.

The three of them lay looking up at the stars, and Cousteau said:

“If you’re ever very unhappy one day, remember we’re only specks of dust. A few atoms that fell from a star. We’re only here for a brief instant. Barely the blink of an eye on the universe’s scale. So enjoy it to the fullest. Life is stronger than everything else.”

In the movie, at least, reminiscing about that occasion helped Cousteau cope with what must have been one of the worse events in his life.

No one leaps with joy simply because they entertain a happy thought, of course, when times are sad. But attitude counts. It arises from the story you tell yourself about what happens to you.

If you inform yourself the future’s bleak and you must suffer as a result, you will feel pain. But if you remember you’re a speck of dust, yet can live life to the fullest, your attitude will help you get through even the direst of times.