Photo by Samuel Foster on Unsplash

My family have been acting strangely for a while now.

My siblings and my parents used to go out for most of the day, most days. Out in the morning, back early evening. But they haven’t done that for a long time.

Now they spend every minute of every day at home, with me!

I’m enjoying it so much. I’m getting fed more treats by my brothers when Mum isn’t looking and I’m spending so much more time with everyone. More toys are thrown for me to pick up and more laughter sounds through the house. We have become more of a family.

Everyone is really chilled out. Just hanging around, not doing very much. Chatting, watching their screens or cooking food that I might get to eat if I hang around long enough and sit like a good girl.

The only one who isn’t chilled out is Dad. Usually he dresses smartly and goes out for the day, but now he wears normal clothes every day, and instead goes up to his special table and spends his day there. He will either be typing, talking at his laptop screen or talking with his phone to his ear. Very strange behaviour. He comes down for lunch then goes back up again until dinner.

Walking has become strange too. Every time we see another human coming towards us, with a dog or without, we have to cross the road. If they have a fellow dog with them, Mum sometimes stops to chat, but she has to use a raised voice because she won’t go close to them. I like to sniff my fellow dogs to get all the news and gossip but I’m not allowed to go near them, so I’m not sure if Luna has had her puppies yet, or if Walter managed to catch the rat that’s been living in his human’s garden.

The only people I’ve been able to go near are those I live with. Very strange.

I only go for two walks a day now. I used to go for more — Mum would take me on a few and one of my siblings on another. But Mum only takes me for one a day now, the other walk is with someone else. Then when we get home, whoever has taken me out will go and scrub their hands furiously at the sink for longer than they used to, and then they don’t go outside again unless it’s to go into the garden.

Now that everyone is home all the time, they let me go into the garden much more. It’s great because usually I’d only ask Mum to go into the garden about twenty times a day but now it’s more like one hundred and twenty! It gives me so many more opportunities to chase the birds (maybe I’ll catch one one day), sniff the ground for gossip or bark at the humans walking past the fence.

We haven’t gone out in the car for such a long time. I like going in the car and travelling to far away places but at the moment every we go is on foot. That doesn’t matter though because as long as it’s a walk, its exercise, and I love it.

None of my brothers’ friends have been here. Usually, at least twice a week they drink the liquid that makes them loud and giddy and they stumble into the night, returning later on with their friends to play loud music and chat. I like these gatherings because they let me hang out with them. But they haven’t done this for ages. I haven’t seen their friends for ages. It’s strange because they are always happy when they are with their friends, I hope they aren’t unhappy now that they aren’t seeing them.

When my fur starts to get quite long, usually I get taken to a human who sorts it out, but I haven’t seen the fur-cutting human for ages. Mum has been doing it instead, which is a bit freaky. I hope I don’t look weird like my brothers do, who all decided it would be a good idea to shave all their head fur off.

Another strange thing my family have started doing is once a week, going outside and clapping. Mum lets me go with her and I like to bark whilst they clap because it’s exciting, even though I’m not sure why they are doing it. I get to see all the people that live around us. They all stand at their doorsteps and wave to each other from their gardens whilst they clap. Mum likes to have a chat with Lisa from next door (from a distance obviously). After a while, the clapping dies down and we go back inside to carry on doing not very much, but Mum will always tell Dad about Lisa’s “amazing work” at “the hospital”. Whatever the point of the clapping is, it definitely lifts the mood once we go back inside. It makes the air lighter and my humans happier.

Mum turns on the screen at the same time each evening to watch three humans talking. They must be talking important things because it happens every day.

Whatever is going on right now is strange. I don’t know how much longer it will last, and I don’t think my humans know either.

But whatever happens, I can safely say that I’m having a great time spending every minute of every day with my lovely family.