So what can you do?

Although things, like playing games and watching endless Youtube videos (who has had a recommended video spree?) may help initially, there are many other things to do that can help with the current situation.

Here are some things you should be doing to make sure you don’t spiral down into a loneliness trap.

1. Stay connected through video or voice apps

Photo by Sincerely Media on Unsplash

Alluded to before, staying connected in this time has never been so important, especially if you live alone.

Although nothing can beat face to face interactions, many video chat apps have surged in popularity across the world.

One that is getting attention is called Houseparty. This free app allows up to eight users to jump on a video call together through desktop or mobile. What is unique about this application is it’s “room’s feature” where people can join other people’s rooms as well. Even better, you can play games during the video calls as well.

But if you want something simple, many chat apps also have their video call functions like Facetime.

“Houseparty is not the only app that can do this. You can do this with Facetime, if everyone is on an Apple phone, and you can do this with Facebook messenger,” — Trever Long (Technology Expert)

If you aren’t a fan of video, there are awesome voice applications like Discord.

It can stream from your desktop so you can share with friends what you’re doing (like games) as well as rooms that you can invite others in to voice call with.

Due to the current coronavirus situation, Discord has also enhanced its free Go Live streaming service so that it can now support 50 simultaneous users rather than 10.

2. Create a schedule around being at home

With many unable to go out on the weekends and also forced to work remotely every weekday, the best thing we can do is schedule things we can control.

Although it might be tempting to put that TV show in the background or mix in personal and work-related tasks together, setting up a schedule ensures you are more productive. Allocating chunks of time for work-related jobs and making sure it’s separate from any personal duties is essential for being on top of your work.

Create as much structure and predictability as you can with the pieces of your life that you do have control over,” says Vincent — clinical psychologist at the University of Houston

Even better, having a weekend schedule, such as having organized video chats with family and friends, is also a great way right now to have social interactions consistently.

It’s as if you were meeting them in person for coffee, but instead, it’s through a video app!

3. Exercise when you can

Exercising has always been proven as a way to make you happier, fitter, and boost energy levels.

In a time when most are stuck in their chairs (or bed) at home, it’s important to find room to exercise, even if it involves basic cardio workouts.

Even without equipment, there are many ways you can get your heart levels pumping.

Some have even taken it to run marathons/half marathons on their balcony.

With many options online on what exercises to do, it’s essential to at least keep active and make sure you’re getting enough of a workout every week.

Summary

In a time when there is a lot of uncertainty, focusing and taking care of your mental health is important.

Being able to keep both a healthy mind and body is essential during the lockdowns and social distancing exercises so we can better our own lives.

Not only this but making sure you keep in contact with friends and family through this ordeal is imperative, especially older members.