Lopsided Hearts

Mine beat like crazy every time I saw him.

Photo by Kristina Litvjak on Unsplash

“Excuse me,” a deep voice said as I reached for the last piece of luggage on the store shelf. I looked up at the handsome face staring down at me. He had a strong chin, dark wavy hair, and eyes the color of mint. “Are you going to buy that suitcase?”

“I think so,” I said, pulling the brown leather suitcase onto the floor. It was small enough for me to pull, large enough for an overnight trip. It was perfect. And affordable. “It’s just what I need.”

The handsome stranger looked disappointed. “Me too. But you did get here first.” He smiled, exposing a sexy gap between his two front teeth.

“Maybe they have more in the back,” I said.

“No worries. I have an old one at home, but it’s starting to fall apart.” He helped me put the suitcase in my cart. “I travel so much. Lots of one day trips.”

“For business?” I asked.

He nodded. “You too?”

“No.” I shook my head. “I just a got promotion and so I’ll be traveling. But I haven’t done a lot up until now.”

“Here’s a hint.” His hand grazed my shoulder. I felt something warm rush through me, something I hadn’t felt in a long time. “Mark your luggage so you can easily identify it. With an X or something.”

I thanked him and we wished each other good luck.

He smiled again and walked off down the aisle.

As I waited in line to pay, I kept looking around for him. But he was nowhere in sight.

I looked for him again in the parking lot. There were lots of dark haired men pushing carts, unloading purchases into their trunks. But not the handsome man with the gap between his front teeth.

As I drove home, I imagined him on his suitcase search and I hoped that he had found one.

Later that afternoon, Lilly, my six-year-old daughter helped me pack.

“We have to mark it with something special,” I said, remembering the suitcase man’s advice. “So I can spot it easily at the airport.”

“I know!” she exclaimed. With her red magic marker, Lilly drew a big heart on the leather. It was a bit lopsided, perfect for identifying it as mine.

At five o’clock, my sister arrived to spend the night with Lilly. Without her help, I never would have been able to take this promotion at Holland Cosmetics. I hated having to go away, but the higher salary would help with the household bills.

As the plane took off, my heart dropped. I turned my attention to my crossword puzzle. All words led back to the handsome man in the store.

An hour later, the plane landed in Las Vegas. I hurried to the baggage claim area, grabbed my suitcase and headed for the exit.

“Excuse me,” a deep, familiar voice called.

I turned around.

It was him. That attractive man with the gap between his teeth. He pulled a suitcase identical to mine.

In fact, it was mine!

“I think you have my suitcase,” he said, stopping in front of me.

I bent down and checked the tag on the one I had been pulling. Instead of saying Julie Corbin, it said Brad Myerson. “I’m so sorry,” I said. “I even put a heart on it like you suggested. I never imagined anyone else would have drawn one, just like it, sort of lopsided.”

“It’s my daughter’s artwork.” He chuckled.

“Mine too,” I said.

“At least you didn’t get all the way to your hotel. Although you’d probably look pretty good in my dress shirts.”

I’d love to wear your dress shirts. Ohmygod. I hope I didn’t say that out loud.

We stood there for a few minutes talking about the flight. He said he had thought he recognized me as I had walked past his seat. But soon after the captain had turned off the seat belt sign, he had fallen asleep.

As we talked, my phone rang. It was Lilly. “Hi, sweetie,” I said.

Brad smiled at me and walked away, too quickly for me to find him after I’d hung up with my daughter.

Twice now I’d let him just walk out of my life. Maybe we would be on the same flight home. A girl could hope, couldn’t she?

I ate dinner in my room, took a bath and then went to bed. I tried to focus on tomorrow’s cosmetics conference, on the product information I had memorized, but all I could think about was Brad. Between columns of sales dollars and bottles of hair care products, I saw his smile, the gap between his teeth, his mesmerizing eyes.

I woke up groggy and in desperate need of a good cup of coffee. The kiosk in the lobby served lattes and bagels. Just what I needed.

After calling Lilly to say hi, I walked across the street to the office building and went to sign in for the conference. My heart was beating rapidly as I walked among all the strange faces.

And then I heard that voice, the one belonging to the man I’d been dreaming about all night. I nearly spilled my coffee all over my new silk blouse.

“Hi. We meet again,” he said.

I smiled. “Don’t tell you’re going to the cosmetics conference.”

“No. I’m in the Starlight Room, down the hall. The computer geeks.” He touched me lightly on the shoulder. There was nothing light about the tingles that jolted through my body.

He had wanted to talk to me longer at the airport yesterday but that when my husband had called he decided to just walk away.

“That was my daughter,” I explained. “I’m divorced.”

“Welcome to the club.”

While waiting for our conferences to start, we sat in the hallway on a soft leather couch, our knees touching every so often. It felt like I’d known him all my life.

Before leaving for his first seminar, Brad asked me out to dinner.

“I can’t,” I said. “My plane leaves at 6:30.”

“I’m on that flight, too.” He smiled. “But that doesn’t mean we can’t have dinner. How about when we land? A late dinner back in Los Angeles?”

It was the longest, but happiest day of my life. Finally our conferences ended.

Brad and I shared a cab to the airport. While I was calling to check in on Lilly, he changed his seat so that we could sit together.

This time when the plane took off, my stomach still dropped, but there was someone there to hold my hand. I may never get used to flying, but I was already used to having Brad in my life.

Thanks for reading. Stay home and be well.

More love stories for your enjoyment..