Making the Shift from Freelancer to Novelist

No clue how to do it, but why not try?

Yeah, that’s actually me. Don’t I look novelist-y? Image by my friend, Emily Billington.

“Emme, I know there’s a novel in you somewhere!” my mother declared, misty-eyed, at the end of an emotional speech during my wedding reception.

Raise a glass. Clink.

A sea of heads nodded in agreement. My uncle caught my eye and gave me a wink and a thumbs-up as if to say, “You can do it, sport.”

The thing is, I have never said that I wanted to write a novel. Ever.

Sure, I love to write. That’s been no secret since childhood. But, my stories have always been about true events that have happened to me. I just always had a knack for telling them.

There is no imagination in my writing. Life has handed me my material. I just put it into words — stroke my experiences into syllable-strung sketches.

As I’ve found success as a freelance writer, I must say that the idea of composing an entire novel sounds intriguing. Hard as hell, but appealing.

Here’s why:

1. You have the same story swirling in your head for months — or years.

2. It tests the limits of human imagination.

3. But, you can pull from real-life experiences.

4. You can set goals no matter how big or small.

5. The end result must be such a wild high.

1. You Have the Same Story Swirling in Your Head for Months — or Years

How many times a day does a story idea come into your head? You rush to scribble it down on a piece of paper, or make a note on your phone? Two, five, ten, fifty times a day?

And, isn’t the idea that you forget to write down always the best idea? You know, the one that got away?

Writers must whip up story idea after story idea. We have all experienced the fear that one day the stories will run out — the well will run dry.

Then POOF, a surge of creativity strikes and suddenly we’re back in the game.

It’s a daunting place to be, pounding out article after article on advice, life lessons or a real-life story that people will actually care enough about to read to the end.

It is hard to design stories that matter.

At times it can be downright maddening, in fact.

How nice does it sound to have only one project driving you bonkers?

Not these fragments

and topics — — and headlines — — — — -

and words — — — and pieces

and parts —

twisting and turning,

banging and barging — against our frontal lobes.

A novel would be one tight package. Pretty with a bow. One delicate infant to cradle.

2. It Tests the Limits of Human Imagination

You know that feeling you get after you’ve read a really good book. You need a moment:

To say good-bye to the characters.

To process. . . well, everything.

To appreciate the author and marvel at what they’ve produced.

I think I might have been a psychopathic stalker, or a highly sought-after detective in my past life because when I admire someone’s work, I tend to get a little creepy.

I immediately soak up their socials, visit their websites and order everything they’ve ever written. Arrest me.

I am just fascinated by what our brains can do. How do novelists create these worlds, these characters, the engrossing dialogue that suck us in so deeply?

That make us feel so incredibly much?

Could my brain create a backdrop that would entrap readers? I don’t know.

But I think I might want to try. I want to see what my brain is capable of consummating.

3. You Can Pull from Real Life Experiences

Alice Liddell. Have you ever heard of her? She allegedly was the inspiration behind Lewis Carroll’s Alice. You know, the one in the ultimate acid trip of Wonderland.

While the Cheshire Cat and the Mad Hatter were probably pure imagination, Carroll took a real-life little girl, characteristics and all, and plopped her in this imaginary, fantastical world.

The storyline in a novel might be spawned by sparks of imagination. But, the characters could have a potpourri of DNA from various people in your life — your non-fiction life.

4. You Can Set Goals No Matter How Big or Small

My freelance goals get heftier each month. Sometimes just one day of procrastination, or sluggishness can set me back and risk screwing up the week’s momentum.

Receiving a rejection on an article that I was optimistic would soar, can affect my mindset and time warp me back to the land of Imposter Syndrome — a terrible place to be.

Freelance goals are so patchy and personal that our daily to-do lists probably all look much different, but with one common destination —to produce work. Again and again and again.

Completing a novel as the final destination, well, as lofty as that goal may sound, its timeline can be more lenient. Perhaps hitting a daily word count, or reworking a scene as your morning task.

With less pressure to produce, produce, produce, I would imagine the process might be slower, but beautiful to watch unfold.

5. The End Result Must Be Such a Wild High

“I wrote a book.” I mean, c’mon, instant bragging rights.

The dedication and discipline to design a story — characters-plot-setting-dialogue-title-theme-subplot-chapters-structure-rhythm-verse-imagery-metaphors-foreshadowing-diction-flashbacks-symbolism — deserves a beer.

Next round’s on me.

I feel pride when I finish writing a meaty article. I cannot imagine the feeling of accomplishment when finishing writing a novel.

I have such respect for writers who have achieved this. Published or not. Best-seller or not. It doesn’t matter.

They showed up. They did the work.

They said they could. And they did.

Cheers to you.

I think I’m going to start. Why not?

Who wants to celebrate in 2030 when it’s finally done?