Mastering the Art of Pre-Suasion

Book notes and actionable tactics from “Pre-Suasion” by Cialdini

Cialdini’s 1984 masterpiece Influence is one of my favorite books of all time. It’s an international bestseller and a must-read if you’re at all interested in marketing or psychology.

As you can imagine, I was more than happy when, after a 30-year wait, Robert Cialdini published his second solo book in 2016: Pre-Suasion: A Revolutionary Way to Influence and Persuade.

The book starts with a story of Cialdini’s friend, who runs a Toronto-based consulting business. His friend often received complaints about his proposed fee when bidding on big projects, with clients asking for 10–15% price cuts.

Then, during one proposal meeting, he stumbled upon a simple “trick” that solved the problem forever.

After he did his regular presentation, just before declaring his $75,000 fee, he joked, “as you can tell, I’m not going to be able to charge you a million dollars for this.” The client looked up from the written proposal and said, “well, I can agree to that!”

The meeting continued without a single reference to compensation and ended with a signed contract.

Although mentioning the unrealistic $1 million price tag doesn’t always win him the project (there are far too many other variables involved for that), it almost always eliminates all price objections.

And although he stumbled onto it, Cialdini’s friend is not alone in using the effects of launching a large number into the air to influence others. Consider this video of Steve Jobs announcing the very first iPad in 2010:

Jobs starts off by saying that $1,000 is the price most people would expect to pay for this new Apple device; he even puts the $999 price tag up on the big screen behind him. After a bit of build-up, he reveals the real price of $499 and the entire crowd begins cheering — $499 suddenly felt pretty cheap!

There’s a reason why Steve Jobs unveiled the price of Apple’s iPad that way. It’s the same reason why Cialdini’s friend stopped getting complaints about his fees: what we present first changes the way people experience what we present to them next.

The “trick” we’re talking about here is called anchoring, and there is plenty of scientific research to back up its effectiveness:

People said they’d be willing to spend more money on dinner when the restaurant was named Studio 97, as opposed to Studio 17.

The price people would pay for a box of Belgian chocolates grew after they’d been asked to write down a pair of high (versus low) digits from their Social Security number.

Observers’ estimates of an athlete’s performance increased if he was wearing a high (versus low) number on his jersey.

In fact, the impact of what goes first isn’t limited to numbers at all. Anchoring using numerals is just one example to demonstrate the impeccable power of “pre-suasion”, a term coined by Cialdini which he defines as follows:

“Pre-suasion is the practice of getting people sympathetic to your message before they experience it.”

To illustrate what he means by this, consider some other examples — I won’t give away all of them, otherwise what’s the point in picking up the book yourself…