Sexy Activities in May While Sheltering at Home

Kick off the month with a bang. We can always get back to our carnal nature, whether in the great outdoors bathed in the light of a great fire or in the privacy of our own homes.

This year your May Day celebration is unlikely to include virginal maypole dances, but if you are sheltering with a partner, some outdoor fucking in front of a fire may be the ticket. Or create your own ritual — maybe with your own pole.

Maybe you won’t erect something quite as large as a traditional maypole in your room, but instead, you can engage in cock worship to accomplish similar goals.

Or you can attend one of the many virtual orgies that have popped up since the Coronavirus took hold.

At a minimum, May 1 is also No Pants Day, so you can at least enjoy going bottomless. It appears to be the thing to do these days.

May 5 is Make Out Day, so cuddle up and get kissing. Given that it is also Cinco de Mayo, feel free to loosen up with some tequila or a margarita first.

Maybe you won’t erect something quite as large as a traditional Maypole in your room, but instead, you can engage in cock worship to accomplish similar goals.

Then May 8 is Outdoor Intercourse Day, so back out to your yard for some communing in nature, or, if that is not an option, maybe out on your balcony. If you can run a marathon on a balcony, surely you can use it for some marathon sex.

But don’t be like these jerks who headed out into public to make your sex videos. Save that for next year.

Virtual dates and orgies can also be available if you are sheltering solo, but if that is not your scene, the month of May is good for something else that does not require a partner at all…

Photo by Annie Spratt on Unsplash

May is Masturbation Month

Apparently, May likes to have it both ways. In addition to playing with others, May also celebrates playing with yourself.

Masturbation surely predates May Day, but Masturbation Month is a much more recent development.

In 1994, President Bill Clinton fired Surgeon General Joyce Elders after she suggested that masturbation be included in the sex education curriculum. (The incident spawned a documentary named “Sticky: A (Self) Love Story”.)

In protest, starting the following year, sex toy seller Good Vibrations began to promote May as Masturbation Month, noting that “‘the merry, merry month of May’ has long been seen as symbolizing sexual awakening.”

Good Vibrations presents a compelling list of reasons to please yourself all month long:

“Because masturbation is immensely pleasurable, invigorating, rejuvenating and fun.

Because sexual pleasure is each person’s birthright.

Because masturbation is the ultimate safe sex.

Because masturbation is a joyous expression of self love.

Because masturbation offers numerous health benefits including menstrual cramp relief, stress reduction, endorphin release, stronger pelvic muscles, reduction of prostate gland infection for men and resistance to yeast infections for women.

Because masturbation is an excellent cardiovascular workout.

Because each person is their own best lover.

Because masturbation with a partner can be educational and hot.

Because masturbation increases sexual awareness.”

Others have similarly noted many benefits and advantages both to masturbation and removing the stigma surrounding it. You can never be too old or too married to enjoy yourself.

Kinkly published a fun guide to celebrating Masturbation Month, with tips including a daily self-pleasure protocol, masturbation movie marathons, and making a list of your best experiences. And, if you are already missing your partner that much, you might engage in mutual masturbation.