Arizona Cardinals

Arizona made their big acquisition before the draft, trading a second rounder with David Johnson for DeAndre Hopkins. They also added some protection for Kyler Murray in the form of OT Josh Jones. Murray had 3700 yards and 20 passing TDs as a rookie, plus 544 yards and 4 TDs on the ground. Add in a year of seasoning plus a true stud WR and better protection, and he could have a shot at being this year’s Lamar Jackson, at least in fantasy.

Don’t forget about RB Eno Benjamin, taken in the seventh round. A well-rounded and productive player out of Arizona State, don’t be surprised to see Benjamin push for touches in a relatively open backfield. He’s a nice long shot.

Atlanta Falcons

The Falcons “draft” acquisition was veteran TE Hayden Hurst, who could step into a productive role. Atlanta’s draft focused on defense. With no new runner around, this could be a big chance at a bounce-back year for Todd Gurley.

Carolina Panthers

The Falcons weren’t the only draft to focus on defense. For the first time in modern history, a team used every draft pick they had on defense. I guess new Panthers coach Matt Rhule made his point.

Chicago Bears

The Bears used their top draft pick on Notre Dame TE Cole Kmet in the second round. Kmet is a good blocker who should help this offense, but he doesn’t have great fantasy upside, especially while Jimmy Graham is around. If you’re hoping to add a good dynasty tight end, this was not your year.

Dallas Cowboys

The Cowboys got the best skill player in the draft in WR CeeDee Lamb, but it’s not an ideal fantasy landing spot for him. Amari Cooper has just signed a five-year $100-million extension, and it’s not like Dallas is going to stop feeding Ezekiel Elliott. Michael Gallup falls off the fantasy radar now as the likely WR3, but don’t forget that he had 1100 yards and 6 TDs last year.

That’s the sort of upside you can expect Lamb to grow into in time, and he can be more of a 1B to Cooper than a #2. Don’t worry too much about Cooper or Zeke falling off. Really, this offense should just get even better, which means more yards and TDs to go around. The biggest winner here is probably Dak Prescott, who looks like a probable top-5 fantasy QB again next year.

Detroit Lions

You can expect RB D’Andre Swift to be a high fantasy draft pick. Swift is the latest talented runner out of Georgia, but he’s small and has never carried the full load. Don’t expect that to change in Detroit, where the Lions want to share RB touches between Kerryon Johnson and maybe even Bo Scarborough. Swift is easily the best receiver of the trio but he may struggle to get consistent touches and likely won’t have high TD numbers. When’s the last time Detroit had a good fantasy RB? Avoid this entire situation.

Green Bay Packers

The Packers went into the draft badly needing receiver help, and they left it with a QB project and a big bruising RB. What?! Green Bay got the lowest possible grade from just about every draft expert, and for good reason. They did little to help the team in the immediate future, and their moves might have hurt almost everyone on the offense.

A.J. Dillon was a huge reach in the second round. He’s a big runner and signals Green Bay’s intend to run the ball and run some more, and all he really does for now is hurt Aaron Jones’s value. Downgrade Aaron Rodgers too, since Green Bay may run the ball more and didn’t give him any help.

TE Josiah Deguara will likely end up as more of an H-back, deployed in a Kyle Juszczyk role. He has no fantasy value. And before you get too excited about WRs Allen Lazard or Marquez Valdes-Scantling as sleepers, even Rodgers can’t turn nothing into something. Look for Green Bay to add a veteran WR2 later this offseason.

As for Jordan Love? Let someone else take the plunge. Love wasn’t a big fantasy producer in college and won’t get his chance for multiple seasons.

Los Angeles Rams

The Rams surprised by using their top two picks on offense, and both of them should have your attention. Cam Akers should immediately contend for touches in a backfield that’s suddenly open after dumping Gurley. Akers scored 18 TDs last season and is a good receiver and pass blocker, and he might be the most talented back on the roster. Don’t forget how awesome Todd Gurley was just two years ago. Akers probably won’t be that, but he has big time upside in an offense people may have forgotten about too quickly.

Van Jefferson is an interesting WR sleeper too. He had perhaps the best hands in the class, and there’s some room on the depth chart with Brandin Cooks gone. He seems like more of a possession receiver for now, but if Cooper Kupp gets hurt again, Jefferson has boom potential.

Minnesota Vikings

First-round pick Justin Jefferson should step right into Stefon Diggs’s role in the offense, though he may not duplicate his production right away. And remember, Diggs had only 63 receptions in an inconsistent year with a run-first offense, and that was with Adam Thielen hurt all year. I like Thielen as a nice sleeper who could have a big season, while Jefferson may settle in around the 800 yards and 5 TDs range, for now. He has WR1 upside down the road but may take awhile to settle into it, so you’ll have to be patient. When Jefferson gets his chance at WR1, this will be a very different looking team.

New Orleans Saints

The Saints only added four draft picks, none of whom are fantasy worthy. TE Adam Trautman looks third on the depth chart at best, and while that probably means a few touchdowns in New Orleans, it doesn’t make him notable in fantasy. You already know what the Saints offense looks like. Full speed ahead.

New York Giants

Not much to note in New York, though you’d certainly hope using a top-5 pick on OT Andrew Thomas should help Saquon Barkley’s production bounce back. This is the Daniel Jones show now, for better and for worse.

Philadelphia Eagles

Philly remade their offense in the draft, adding speedy receivers all over the place. The big name was first-round pick, WR Jalen Reagor, who looks like a great scheme fit and has eventual WR1 upside on this team if he can find chemistry with Carson Wentz. Don’t forget, though, this is an egalitarian offense that shares the ball and targets TEs and RBs a ton, and Reagor may be the fourth or fifth option this year, depending on what happens with Alshon Jeffery and Desean Jackson. None of them look like great fantasy options, but Reagor has a bright future with a somewhat limited ceiling.

The Eagles also added speedsters John Hightower and Quez Watkins later in the draft, but both look like long shots to make a fantasy impact. Veteran Marquise Goodwin could be an interesting long shot sleeper. He’s a track star and could step into a bigger role if (when) Jackson or Jeffery get hurt.

You’d think all those new WRs should help Carson Wentz’s fantasy value, but he was barely a fantasy QB1 when healthy this year and now he might have to contend with losing occasional snaps to Jalen Hurts. Hurts is a long-term stash but his running numbers give him high upside down the road if he hits. For now, his presence hurts Wentz’s value. Philadelphia’s offense got better in the draft, but not for fantasy purposes.

San Francisco 49ers

The 49ers traded up for WR Brandon Aiyuk, calling him the best receiver on their board, and it’s easy to see why. Aiyuk is a YAC monster, and he’ll fit perfectly in this Kyle Shanahan offense that likes to get the ball into the hands of its playmakers and let them do the rest.

Aiyuk should help spread out the offense, but I’m not convinced he’s a good fantasy prospect. Remember, Deebo Samuel topped out at 57 catches for 802 yards and 3 TDs, and Emmanuel Sanders did not pace much better. This is a run-first offense that passes to George Kittle first, second, and third. Aiyuk has limited fantasy appeal for a first-round guy.

The far bigger news in San Francisco is the rising stock of Raheem Mostert. The 49ers traded Matt Breida and didn’t draft a RB. They’ve still got Tevin Coleman, Jeff Wilson, and maybe Jerick McKinnon, but Mostert is going to get a ton of fantasy hype after his breakout in the playoffs. Don’t be surprised if he’s a third-round pick by draft day.

Seattle Seahawks

The Seahawks did their usual, overdrafting guys on no one else’s board, but somehow, it usually works out for them. The offense should look mostly the same, but if you’re desperate at tight end, you could do worse than Colby Parkinson. He could have a shot at the starting job with Will Dissly recovering from a torn Achilles, and that could make him a fringe TE1 candidate at a needy position.

Tampa Bay Buccaneers

All the attention will rightfully be given to Tom Brady and his talented receiving crew, but the defense will give plenty of attention to Mike Evans, Chris Godwin, and Rob Gronkowski too. Don’t forget about Tyler Johnson, my favorite sleeper WR. Ever heard of Brady throwing a lot of passes to a slot WR that runs routes well and is constantly open underneath? If Johnson establishes himself early, he could even be a threat to shock the world and lead them in receptions. Be careful about drafting Evans or Godwin too high, but go ahead and roll with Brady when he’s got so many weapons.

Another of those weapons is RB Ke’Shawn Vaughn, out of Vanderbilt. Vaughn could be a right-place-right-time guy as a better pass blocker than Ronald Jones in an offense where that should be a premium. Vaughn is a rounded back that could end up leading this team in touches. I’m not in love with the talent, but any touch leader on a team with this much offense could have pretty significant fantasy upside.

Washington Haskins

WR Antonio Gandy-Golden is an interesting sleeper to keep an eye on. He put up huge numbers at Liberty, and the Washington WR depth chart is pretty wide open. Terry McLaurin was a great fantasy sleeper last year, and Gandy-Golden has a chance to follow in his footsteps.

Antonio Gibson was more of a weapon than a RB at Memphis, catching more passes than he had runs. He could step into the Chris Thompson role, but that has never been particularly valuable, even in PPR leagues.