Baltimore Ravens

It’s hard to imagine a better landing spot for J.K. Dobbins than the Ravens. Dobbins was the best pure runner in the draft and fits Baltimore’s scheme perfectly. The Ravens had literally the best rushing season in NFL history, so there are plenty of attempts, yards, and TDs to go around. Mark Ingram ain’t going anywhere this season, but he’s in his 30s now and has never exactly been a beacon of health, and Dobbins is just a much better runner than Gus Edwards or Justice Hill. You’re going to have to be patient with Dobbins, maybe even more than this season, but in this system, he’s the sort of guy that could put up Ezekiel Elliott Lite numbers when he gets his shot.

Devin Duvernay was a nice pickup who should fit well, but his fantasy upside is somewhat limited. With Baltimore being so run heavy and featuring the tight ends so much in the passing game, there’s just not a big piece of the pie left for Duvernay even if he does get big playing time.

Buffalo Bills

The Bills already made their biggest draft acquisition a few weeks ago, trading multiple picks for Stefon Diggs. How you feel about Diggs probably depends on how you feel about Josh Allen. The ceiling is somewhat limited. UCF rookie Gabriel Davis is talented but a bit buried on the depth chart for now.

The light may be a bit greener for RB Zack Moss. Buffalo is a run-first offense, and Moss is a pure runner that hits the hole and gets downhill. He posted 1000+ yards and 10+ TDs in each of his last three seasons at Utah, and remember, that’s a PAC-12 school now. Moss makes this backfield very murky with Devin Singletary and T.J. Yeldon. He’s not going to catch many passes, so that limits his ultimate upside, but don’t be surprised if he emerges as a reliable RB2 by the second half of the season. He has workhorse potential.

The Bills got a steal in Georgia QB Jake Fromm in the fifth round. Fromm doesn’t have the physical look or tools but had similar production to #6 pick Justin Herbert, and he’s beat out several QBs that were more physically gifted. Don’t be surprised to see him push for Josh Allen’s job at some point, but even that may not make him particularly fantasy relevant.

Cincinnati Bengals

Joe Burrow is the Day 1 starter after Dalton’s release, so how good can he be in fantasy? Better than you think. Dalton was a low-end starter, and it’s not unreasonable to think Burrow can at least replicate his production from the jump, especially with all the talent around him on offense. That could mean something in the range of 3500 yards and 25 TDs already as a rookie, and don’t forget Burrow averaged 384 yards and 6 TDs on the ground at LSU too. He should be a useful QB2 immediately, and if the rushing stats translate, it won’t be long until he’s a perennial top-10 fantasy QB. If you are thinking about a rookie QB in dynasty, he is far and away the guy to get this year.

I’m less enthusiastic about Tee Higgins. The immediate production will almost certainly be muted with A.J. Green, Tyler Boyd, and John Ross in his way, but it could be Higgins and Boyd a year from now. Higgins is a big red zone threat but his route running skills are raw. He could be one of those guys that puts up 8 TDs on only 50 catches and isn’t super reliable. I’m much more excited about this pushing Tyler Boyd down draft boards as a sleeper.

Cleveland Browns

The Browns used their top pick on stud OT Jedrick Wills, who should make everyone on the offense a bit better. He’ll help Nick Chubb most directly as a powerful run blocker, but he could also protect Baker Mayfield’s blindside and help restore Baker’s confidence to stand and deliver in the pocket.

Harrison Bryant was the top fantasy TE heading into the draft before slipping to the fourth round, and now he’s behind new signee Austin Hooper. He’s a long-term investment that won’t give you much now.

Denver Broncos

Well, John Elway is certainly diving into the deep end of the Drew Lock experience. Lock looked good down the stretch as the starter, and now he’ll add two top receiving options. Jerry Jeudy is obviously the bigger name. He should start opposite Courtland Sutton and produce immediately. Jeudy is an elite route runner that will always be open, and he is a good threat to lead the Broncos in catches right away this year. I like the ceiling of guys like Lamb or Jefferson more if they get there, but Jeudy has a very high floor and could produce Amari Cooper type numbers as a top 10 or 15 WR. He’s a guy that should produce good numbers for a long time.

K.J. Hamler is a speed demon who should settle into the slot. He’s clearly the third option of these three receivers, and don’t forget about Noah Fant. Hamler’s fantasy upside is limited. The biggest winner here might be Lock himself. He has four excellent targets now, plus the strong RB receivers. Lock paced to 3264 yards and 22 TDs as a rookie. He should move into safe QB2 territory, though the ceiling isn’t particularly noteworthy.

Houston Texans

Nothing to report in Houston as they had the least draft capital of anyone. Remember, they’re already short first- and second-round picks next year too from the Laremy Tunsil deal. That could give a little extra staying power to veterans like David Johnson and Brandin Cooks if they do catch on.

Indianapolis Colts

The Colts impacted their offense as much as any team in the draft, and Jonathan Taylor should be high on your watch list. Taylor was a production monster at Wisconsin with over 2000 yards in three straight seasons plus 55 TDs to boot, and now he steps into an equally perfect situation, a run-first offense with an outstanding offensive line. Marlon Mack has been more good than great and can’t stay healthy, so Taylor will get his chance and he may not look back when he does. He’s a speed demon who can score on any touch, and he’s also a nice receiver, a true three-down back that looks like this year’s Saquon Barkley or Ezekiel Elliott at a discount price tag.

WR Michael Pittman was actually the higher draft pick, and he’s a quality all-around receiver who could crack the lineup right away next to T.Y. Hilton. Pittman has a clear path to Colts WR1 once Hilton and Philip Rivers move on, and he should post useful numbers in the meantime. He’ll be much cheaper than names like Justin Jefferson, Tee Higgins, and Jalen Reagor but looks just as valuable.

Jacob Eason slipped in the draft but landed in a great spot. He could have starting potential down the line but doesn’t look like someone you need to stash unless you’re desperate for a starter in 2QB leagues.

Jacksonville Jaguars

The Jags offense is anyone’s guess right now, but it looks like Leonard Fournette and Gardner Minshew will keep their jobs, for now. Jacksonville focused mostly on defense, but Laviska Shenault is the fantasy addition of note. Shenault was one of my favorite WRs in the draft, but I hate this landing spot for him. Shenault is more of a weapon than a receiver, and this is not a creative or explosive offense. There are touches to be had, but Shenault has a low ceiling until the Jaguars add more talent around him.

Kansas City Chiefs

The Chiefs spent the final pick of the first round on Clyde Edwards-Helaire, and it’s hard to imagine a more perfect Andy Reid RB. CEH played in the perfect system at LSU with an abundance of talent around him, and now he’ll step into the exact same situation in Kansas City. He’s a bowling ball with a low center of gravity, an outstanding receiver, and a big goal line threat.

Damien Williams was already falling out of favor, so Edwards-Helaire should get snaps early. Reid already called him a better version of Brian Westbrook, a former fantasy monster, but remember Reid hasn’t typically had a workhorse back. That might not matter. You’re not drafting CEH for his rushing yards, so if he only gets 10 or 12 carries a game, that’s not that big of a deal. You want Christian McCaffrey here, and the 4 to 6 receptions Edwards-Helaire will get each game are far more valuable than those extra carries. Even 12 to 15 touches a game in the best offense in the league are immensely valuable, especially when you consider the TD opportunities.

This is still Patrick Mahomes’s team, obviously, and don’t trick yourself into being worried about his numbers. Edwards-Helaire will only make the offense more dangerous. He’ll be a big time fantasy factor immediately.

Las Vegas Raiders

Henry Ruggs was the first WR off the board, but he should not be the first one taken in your fantasy draft. Ruggs never hit 50 receptions or 750 yards in any season at Alabama. He’s the sort of fantasy WR that frustrates me to no end, a track star who will catch three balls for 140 yards one week and then get shut out the next. Even if he finishes with 1000 yards, a third of those may come in two games. Ruggs is not a fantasy target for me and will likely be overdrafted.

Bryan Edwards is a much more rounded receiver who could step into Tyrell Williams type production in a couple years. I wouldn’t be stunned if he turns into a more consistent fantasy producer than Ruggs. Lynn Bowden is not a running back as much as a weapon, a gimmick really. Expect a few gadget plays each game but unreliable fantasy production. This is still the Josh Jacobs show in Vegas.

Los Angeles Chargers

The Chargers got their man in Justin Herbert. Herbert will likely start the season behind Tyrod Taylor, but expect him to get the starting nod sometime midseason. The Chargers have terrific weapons and a strong history of fantasy production at QB. I’m not excited about Herbert’s upside, but he should quickly be a high-end QB2 option, and I’d probably prefer him to Tua.

I’m not a big fan of Joshua Kelley as a prospect, but fantasy football is about opportunity and there’s some opportunity there with Melvin Gordon gone. Kelley is a downhill runner to keep an eye on, and at least a decent handcuff.

Miami Dolphins

The Dolphins finally got their franchise QB in Tua Tagovailoa, but they may have to wait a bit to see him. It’s long been rumored that Tua could essentially red-shirt his rookie season, so that hurts his fantasy value. He may not be a name you need to rush out to grab either way. Tagovailoa produced big numbers at Alabama, but he literally had three better receivers there than anyone in Miami. He’s also not as mobile as you think and never even ran for 200 yards in a season at Bama, so there’s no value there. You end up with a pocket passer with poor receivers on a bad team. If you’re in a 2QB league, Tagovailoa has value as a sure starter, eventually, but otherwise I’m passing.

The more interesting development was on the offensive line. The Dolphins spent first, second, and fourth-round picks rebuilding their line, and that’s great news for whichever RB emerges. Jordan Howard is the incumbent, but he’s never been a particularly special runner. Newly acquired Matt Breida had some flashes in San Francisco but that was in Kyle Shanahan’s system and he never stayed healthy. There’s room for a real sleeper in Miami. Keep an eye on Myles Gaskin or rookie Malcolm Perry deep in your draft.

New England Patriots

The Patriots traded out of the first and never ended up taking a quarterback, so the job may be Jared Stidham’s — for now. Look for the Pats to add a veteran at some point, maybe Andy Dalton, and there’s little reason to expect Stidham to have fantasy relevance anyway. This offense lacked firepower in a huge way last year and did nothing to upgrade itself.

The only fantasy rookies of note are TEs Devin Asiasi and Dalton Keene, who will push Matt LaCosse for time. Asiasi is the one you want in fantasy. Keene is more of a blocker, while Asiasi is a big target who could develop into something down the line.

New York Jets

Baylor WR Denzel Mims fell much further than expected, and now he could have a path to being the Jets WR1. Don’t expect that role to fall into his lap, though. Quincy Enunwa and Jamison Crowder are established targets, so Mims will have to establish himself against them and other veterans. Mims is still developing and has clear upside in time, and this is why he’s hot, but he may not produce much for the first year or two.

Lamical Perine has a decent chance of winning the backup RB job, so he could be your LeVeon Bell handcuff.

Pittsburgh Steelers

Keep an eye on what position Chase Claypool ends up at. There was talk of him ending up at tight end, and he has much more interesting upside there as a big red zone threat in an offense that loves to throw to its tight end. He’s a bit of a long-term flier either way.

Tennessee Titans

The Titans doubled down on their run-first offense, grabbing OT Isaiah Wilson in the first round to replace the departed Jack Conklin. They also added RB Darrynton Evans in the third round. Evans is more of a speedy change-of-pace, so don’t worry about him stealing touches from Derrick Henry or even pushing for his job if Henry leaves. If anything, the slight uncertainty here could make Henry a nice draft day value.