So how bad is it?

Let’s start with Norwegian, my absolute favourite airline. After revolutionising the aircraft experience with a high quality experience at a low quality price, it was safe to say Norwegian had its fair share of costs. With $380 million to pay off and Bjoern Kjos (Co-founder and CEO) stepping down last July it wasn’t in an incredible position to start with. It has already raked the Norwegian government of their oil-money allowance and still finds itself struggling financially: laying off 7300 of its staff temporarily.

Unfortunately, this seems to be a common pattern at the moment. Many articles, including the ones I have linked above will tell you the same. So what costs are causing these lay-offs and cut-backs?

It comes down to a number of things, but quite simply in the airline industry, no passengers means no business. While we’re stuck at home, waiting to be unleashed into the world again, airlines are sitting on bean-bags and sweating like dogs.

‘When could things return to normal?’ We all wonder.

By ‘sitting on bean-bags’ of course, I mean they’re worrying overwhelmingly about:

The cost of leaving their old fleet of planes idle for too long

The attitude of shareholders to their imminent losses

Where the hell to park thousands of planes all at once

How to pay for the hundreds of new planes they may have ordered

How to prevent passengers from spreading the virus onboard (Lufthansa has a fantastic solution to this)

Everything listed above has a cost. And costs aren’t easy to pay for with no money.

No one needs to be an economist to work that one out. But you do need to be a strong-witted financial advisor to work for one of the big airlines at the moment.

This is where my opinion comes in. Since airlines aren’t making much money at the moment, they’re going to need to make it back, right? ‘Borrow and spend now, pay back later…’ is a simplified version of what the financial advisors may be saying.

Increasing the rate at which government bail-outs and loans are paid back therefore, may come in the form of increased air-tickets. Why would Ryanair sell a $40 ticket when it could just as easily sell it for $70 or more?

Granted, its no drastic difference. But its a step back in terms of how we, especially Europeans, see travel. People of lower income will more often stay domestic and potentially, Southend will begin to accommodate more visitors and look less run down…

Photo by Eve Woodhouse on Unsplash

Then again, that would take a miracle.

Overall, it’s impossible to predict the outcome of the current climate. No one knows exactly when things could return to normal. But if one thing is for certain, the travel industry may be one of the worst hit out of all. That being the case, things are winding up to be extremely different in the near future. So watch this space, or this sky rather.

About the author:

Hi, I’m Will. I’m a student, I read books. I write articles inspired by the books, for you, to help your lifestyle. No click bait. Just good information.