People Over Profit Is Becoming the New Norm

The future of business is people over profits. Who is paying attention?

Photo by mauro mora on Unsplash

Even before this global pandemic that has brought economies grinding to a halt, I have been beating the drum for people over profits. Never in my wildest dreams did I think that we would see an event that forces companies’ hands like this one.

For years, the American economy has been built on profits and stock prices. Successful companies were ones who could make their stock prices go up. To do this, they needed to show profits (or potential future profits).

Yet, in a matter of weeks, the old way of doing things has been abandoned by most. With people quarantined at home and many losing their jobs, consumers are not purchasing as they used to.

And so we have a seismic shift in our economy. Instead of maximizing productivity and profitability, the future of business will be maximizing goodness. And some are being left behind.

Selfish Companies

Hobby Lobby has been served Cease and Desist orders around the country for failing to abide by stay home orders. This is classic profits over people business practice. We will stay open and sell products, even if we endanger the lives of our workers and the community at large.

Amazon has been accused of planning a smear campaign against an employee who staged a walkout due to unsafe conditions.

Many other companies are facing a choice: business as usual or protection for employees and the community. Many are making the wrong choice. There are many companies that are operating in ways that put their employees in harm’s way. It is only by acts of government and the threat of fines that causes changed behaviors. This means that many companies will only act for the greater good when compelled to do so. This is a scary thought for the future of our world.

Profits of People Mindset

In so many ways, the economy has hurt workers for the sake of profits. The U.S. lags behind so many countries on paid maternity and paternity leave. Paid sick leave is not usually given, especially for new or low paid employees.

This lack of benefits is compounding the effects of the pandemic. Workers are going to work while sick because they can’t afford not to. This is causing the virus to spread.

Many adults in the U.S. are going to get checks for $1200. This is approximately what a minimum wage earner makes in a month.

Again, companies will not take employee health or flourishing seriously. Most companies do the bare minimum required by law. And the bare minimum will not cut it.

People First Companies

Luckily, not every company remains profit first. Many are or are becoming people-first companies. There are countless stories of companies doing the right thing for their employees and for their communities during this crisis. I only hope that it is a trend that continues after this pandemic is over.

So how do we ensure that trend continues? First, companies need to pay a fair wage. A company in Seattle has made their company minimum wage $70,000 and it is working out just fine for them. Paying lower-level workers fairly means top-level salaries need to take a cut. As most executives are making many times more than their subordinates, and the gap is only widening, this change shouldn’t be too hard to accomplish. It’s all about priorities. A company that puts people first will pay their people well.

Second, paid maternity leave, paternity leave, and sick leave should be the norm for all employees. If you don’t want people bringing their sickness to work, pay them to stay home. This will help productivity in the long run and will make happier and more productive employees. The same goes for maternity and paternity leave. Other countries are doing it, why can’t we?

Hopefully companies see that the way they have done business does not work anymore in light of the pandemic and they change their ways for the better. Unfortunately, many companies do the bare minimum as required by law, and may need to be compelled to put people over profits. Consumers, we can do this ourselves. We must refuse to give our business to companies that don’t treat their employees or communities well. If we put people first in our purchasing decisions, companies will be forced to follow suit.

If anything, the pandemic has shown us where our economy is broken. Fortunately, there are many companies working hard to put people first. Hopefully, many more will follow in the future.