Survival

Bipolar depression is temporary. It’s important to remind yourself of that truth often. The cycle can last for a while, but it always ends. Always.

I love spring. I love seeing the world come to life and everything turn green. Yet, something about spring triggers mania in me.

At first, mania is a marvellous thing because it helps me work in the yard and tackle spring cleaning. Mania never comes without bringing its antithesis, depression, close behind. That is not marvellous.

The depression starts in late spring. It can be a brief duration lasting only a few weeks, or it can hang on for months, dragging me down until late summer and even into fall.

Bipolar depression is temporary.

I survive because I know it will end. Even if it’s with me until the leaves on the trees are golden shades of red and orange, I know it will end.

Slowly, in time, the anger, apathy, and lethargy leave your system. Your heart warms, and you remember how much you love your family and friends. Part of you wants to get out of bed and do things. You finally make an appointment to get your hair cut.

To survive the downturn, I do a four things to prepare.

1. Keep a gratitude list

Gratitude is your best weapon for surviving bipolar depression. Every day, write down at least three things for which you are grateful. Remember to include the minor things such as a text message from a friend checking on you or the gentle rain falling outside.

Read this list as often as possible on your worst days. You’ll want to disagree with the positive message, but some of it will seep through to your heart.

2. Record past triumphs

Keeping a success list is another essential tool in your arsenal. On the good days, keep a record of every success. Big or small, it doesn’t matter. The point is to remind yourself of what you’ve already accomplished.

Even on the worst days there will be some success. If you take a shower, eat a meal, or stay alive — those are all wins you should record. The better days will have bigger victories to chronicle.

3. Warn loved ones ahead of time

Your support team can best help you if they know what to expect. Let them know if there’s a time of year that’s especially hard for you. Tell them how you might act, and what warning signs spell trouble.

After a depressive episode, think back over the experience and look for new insights you might have gained into how depression affects you. Share these observations with those who love you.

4. Hold on to hope

Always keep hope in your heart. Every storm eventually ends, and so will the tsunami of bipolar depression. Not every day will be bleak and colorless. The coming dawn needs to be the hope that keeps you afloat in the raging sea of depression. Write your words of hope where you can see them.

Keeping a journal is an integral part of my mental health. It’s where I write my gratitude list, my successes, and keep up with my experiences. Referring to my journals later gives me a basis to tell my family and friends what to expect and when to step in to help. Reading my own words gives me hope that better times will return.