Perspective in the Time of Corona

A short story about keeping perspective and sanity in times of a pandemic, fear, and social distancing

© Original artwork by Jonat Deelstra

Abe could feel his heart beat in his throat. He still couldn’t believe what had happened within weeks. Two weeks ago he was looking forward to getting a permanent contract. He celebrated the fact with his friends. They went out for dinner and drinks. Even thinking about the smell, taste and bustling energy inside the restaurant made him feel melancholic.

He stared at his phone and read the latest headlines. He felt like he was in a bad science fiction movie. The park in front of his house was empty, not a soul in sight. This time of year people usually sat around a barbecue and drank until dawn. Even if it was chilly at night.

Today was a final blow. The disease came closer, one of his best friends had been in bed for three days, feeling unbelievably ill.

He missed going out. He wanted to meet up with friends and talk, drink and dance. He facetimed his dad instead, a glass of wine in his hands. An image of his dad appeared, blurry because the internet had been slower in the last few days. A robotic voice greeted him. ‘How are you doing Abe, any news?’

‘You sound weird. Can you hear me?’

‘Better now?’

‘Yes.’

‘So, what’s up?’

‘I’ve been let go. My contract hasn’t been renewed.’

‘I’m sorry.’ His dad looked away from the camera. ‘But hey, look on the bright side, you can finally work on that book — ’

‘Don’t! Not again. I wish I could fall asleep and wake up when this is all over. I mean, we’re at war with an invisible enemy. I’m alone in my house. The walls are closing in on me. I barely have any savings. I can’t go out and see my friends. I can’t hold Mira. She’s gone by the way. Got on the last flight to Munich. She wanted to be with her family. I don’t know where we’ll go from here. How long this will last.’

‘It will be over before you know it. Then you can see each other again. You can go out again. Find a new job.’

‘How can you be so optimistic? Who knows how long we’re locked up in our homes? It’s like we’re in a liberal prison. We can go out once a day for groceries or exercise. Inmates can go out once a day to exercise. Together! We can only go out by ourselves. I read that people are being locked up for being together in some countries, even if it’s only three people. I already am alone.’

Silence on the other end.

‘Say something!’

His dad looked back at him through the screen. He too looked defeated but he wanted to hold it together. ‘I don’t know either, son. We’ve never experienced something like this. It makes you think, doesn’t it? All these decades generations before us fought for these liberties of ours. Simple things like going out to see a movie, or taking a trip abroad without being harmed. Now, people are scared for their primary needs. Will there be enough food?’

‘I can’t analyze the situation with a clear mind yet. My whole world has been turned upside down. No job, no friends, no girl, and I’m locked inside. Oh, and I’m out of toilet paper. I tried to find some earlier today. I went to four supermarkets. The almost empty streets felt eerie to me. People looked at me in fear. They walked around me and kept their distance. It’s such a weird feeling. With every cough, I think I might have it.’

‘Get a grip, you most likely don’t have it. You’re making yourself crazy. Get out of your head. Stop feeling overwhelmed. Try to adapt to the new situation. Think differently.’

‘Honestly, can you?’

The screen froze and stated: ‘poor connection.’ Abe cursed and threw his phone aside.

Two hours later he had finished an expensive bottle of Malbec from 1984 which he had saved for a special occasion. He lost himself countless of articles and YouTube videos. Most made him pessimistic. He ignored several calls. He read about at least seven conspiracy theories before he finally fell asleep on the couch.

There was a knock on the door. At first, Abe decided to let it go. He wanted to sleep. But whoever was knocking was persistent. Abe walked towards the door and looked through the door viewer. The only thing he saw was a bright white light. Curious, he opened the door and found a child standing there, glowing. The girl reminded Abe of a Christmas ornament of a snowman with lights inside.

‘What do you want? Shouldn’t you be in bed?’

‘My name is Moon,’ the young girl introduced herself. ‘Good evening Abraham.’ Abe estimated she was about twelve. Abe thought life was throwing another cruel joke at him. But fortunately for him, this was not the case.

The girl who called herself the Moon took Abe’s hand and told him they were going to her home up in the sky. For a brief moment, Abe was startled by holding hands with someone. A jolt went through him. Initially, he felt weird about it. People didn’t shake hands anymore. But the age-old soothing feeling of human touch got the better of him.

Amazed, Abe flew while holding hands with the girl Moon. Looking down at the earth, his house started getting smaller and smaller. He kept looking down, his heart growing less heavy with the increasing height. When he looked down, his house was unrecognizable, a blur in a darker pool which was his city. The empty streets magnified his predicament. Everyone’s predicament, really. Squares and national monuments stood like remnants of a different time. Shrines even. Abe thought about the times he sat at such squares in the sun with his friends around him.

Soon his city too became a blur until it was completely removed from sight by the clouds.

As the clouds’ mist touched his cheeks, he felt lighter. As if he dropped a few pounds.

He looked at the girl who called herself Moon, who looked up towards her home. Abe looked down at his planet, thinking about what was going on down there. What would people think of this? For the first time in his life, he did not care as much as he would normally have. It was a liberating feeling.

After what felt like days, Moon warned him that they were about to arrive.

Suddenly, Abe felt drawn to the shiny silver planet. With a pop, he was softly pulled to the surface.

Moon invited Abe to take a seat and take in the view.

‘Won’t I need a mask to breathe?’

‘Aren’t you breathing now?’ she asked, suppressing a laugh. ‘Tell me, what do you see?’

‘A tiny speck that I know as the earth, as my home. Huh … wait. Normally the world is speckled with white clouds and stuff. Like you see from the satellites. Now it’s clear. In fact, it’s glowing green and blue!’

‘What does that mean you think?’

‘Uh, no more planes, less pollution?’ He’d read that in an article.

‘Partly, yes, but it goes beyond that. Earth and its inhabitants are healing. The blue and green energy fields represent an inner healing process.’

‘You’re joking, right? Are you one of those nature-is-cleaning-up-the-world kinda gals?’ Abe felt annoyed. People were sick and dying. ‘Who are you?’

‘I’m not like anyone you have or will meet. I’m only presenting myself to you at this moment. So stay aware. And I’m as old as the stones beneath your feet.’ Her white hair came alive with bright light like someone flipped the switch of a lamp.

‘You’re talking in riddles.’

‘Be glad I’m trying to speak your language. Mine would probably make you deaf at the first sound.’

Abe pinched himself and slapped his cheeks. He stood up and looked around. But there was nothing but a vast grey space of rocks and millions of stars illuminating the night. He could identify other planets. He saw stars fall. Slowly, he sat down again, taking it all in. He recognized different star signs from high school books. Never in his life had he truly looked at the magnificence of the sky at night. It had never presented itself so clearly as it did now. It was like he was immersed in a surreal painting. Looking at every color, being enthralled by every stroke. Then a voice awoke him from his trance.

‘You’re part of something larger than yourself. You think you can do and take whatever you want but nature has a fickle heart. Enough is enough. Nature has used her elements to show you your true potential.’ Moon looked at Abe for a reaction but Abe had no idea what to say.

‘Earth was created by an explosion,’ Moon continued. ‘Stars collided and with a bang new matter formed the core of your planet. Fire roared and stones formed. Then the surface cooled and the dampening atmosphere rained down again and the veins of the earth filled with water. Earth was now in balance. Fire was tamed by water and through the winds, the elements blossomed. Earth became whole. Life formed in the waters. Plants supplied the atmosphere with oxygen for new life to bloom until you came along. That ever going process had come to a halt since humans used the elements to their advantage.’

‘I’ve never truly thought about it that way. I mean, there are warnings for climate change and stuff, and I’ve become a vegetarian to contribute a bit, but… I don’t know, it’s like I’m numb to what’s going on in the world right now. I can’t think. I’m paralyzed.’

‘You will come to see it in the coming days or for as long as you need during humanity’s current crisis. People never grant themselves time to reflect. Truly reflect. Not going on a meditation retreat and then going back to business as usual straight after.’ She eyed Abe suspiciously. Abe flushed and felt caught. It seemed like she knew everything about him.

Moon continued, her words hitting Abe to his core. ‘Business won’t go back to usual. You have to back to your usual self. Be present. Think about your past choices. Realize what truly matters in life. What to get out of bed for. Think about how the world works and in what ways it needs mending. Know that every single soul on your planet is in the same situation. You have to do this together. You have to converge and come together again as a species. The world as you knew it has disappeared and will in time make way for a new one. And it’s up to you to turn that into a world that through reflection and change has realized its full potential.’

So that’s what it feels like to have your mind blown, Abe thought. What was she saying? He needed another glass of wine. ‘What is our potential then?’ he asked.

‘Coming together. The universe consists of billions of parts. There are stars, planets, galaxies, and black holes.Every one of them is moving. They’re slowly coming together. That’s where shifts take place. Consider atoms when they cluster together into a molecule. Molecules form organisms when united. These changes create something new. A chain of united reactions. That’s what you’re doing. That’s what mother nature is trying to tell you. Think about what I just said about how the earth and its species came into being. Microscopically small parts came together and formed matter and mass. The more parts were included, the more complex the transition became. The more advanced.’

‘Ok, but how do we come together then?’

‘You should reframe your question. Through the millennia, people have been removed farther and farther apart. Do you know how?’

Abe felt cornered. Like when he was in high school and needed to answer a question in front of the class he didn’t know the answer to. ‘Uhm, the elite? Governments? Personal gain?’

‘Those are pieces of the puzzle, yes. There is, however, one underlying power that drives people apart since the beginning of consciousness.’

‘What?’

‘Fear.’

Abe opened his mouth to say something clever or at least to let Moon know that he knew where he was going. That’s what he usually did when someone said something intelligent and he didn’t want to lose face. But he couldn’t.

Moon nodded. ‘Good. Don’t fear the fact that you don’t understand it. You will when you’re ready. I’ll frame it as briefly as possible. Fear divides. People crave comfort, stability, connection, and control. When fear arises, these desires are smothered in anxiety. How easy has it been to keep people in their homes? Voluntarily! Fear makes people numb.’

‘So that’s why I feel so lethargic? Like I’m trapped and can’t move.’

‘Precisely.’

‘But it’s natural to feel that way, right? Scared, I mean. And to stay inside to protect ourselves and others. I mean, I desperately want things to go back to normal. I feel a sense of good citizenship by staying at home but I’m also angry and wonder when this will end.’

‘I understand. There are, however, two viruses at work. The disease and fear. Both are spreading and they infect anyone in their path — if they’re susceptible. They don’t look at skin color, race, or sexual orientation. People are people as far as infections and fear are concerned. People around the world have similar fears to yours.’

‘But isn’t the virus causing the fear? Isn’t that the result? Isn’t that what’s driving us apart? The invisible force that results in people avoiding each other like the plague. When I’m in the supermarket I feel like a pariah. I…’

Abe felt a sudden overwhelm. His pulse quickened and he started sweating. He concentrated on the view again in silence. He looked at his planet and the vibrant green and blue colors dancing around.

‘What are you feeling, Abe?’

‘I don’t know. I feel trapped. Overwhelmed. Scared. Like I don’t have any control.’

‘I understand. Feel those emotions. But don’t give them more power by dwelling on them and letting them consume your thoughts.’

‘How do I do that? How can I escape the cage that is now my home?’

‘With your mind. The power always lies in your mind. What do you feel now you’re here, looking at the earth, the stars, and the galaxy?’

Abe took in the view again. As his shoulders lifted, he said: ‘Calmer I guess.’

‘So what does that teach you?’ Moon asked, amused.

‘I don’t know.’

‘When you feel like you’ve lost control. When you feel scared, overwhelmed, or lonely,’ the girl paused and locked eyes with Abe before she continued, ‘think of how big those problems are seen from this very spot.People can’t be seen from here. In this universe, all elements are but tiny dots composed of atoms. Besides, all these elements are temporary. Some last longer than others, yes, but all will cease to exist. Whenever you are faced with an obstacle in your life, think of what you would see from here. From a distance, your troubles become smaller and smaller.’

‘Can we really downplay the current issue at hand like that?’

‘You don’t need to generalize the urgency and danger of the virus. It’s there. It needs to be dealt with. But you can get a better perspective on those emotions you feel and how you deal with them. Seen from space the earth has no borders. The spread of the coronavirus is showing that what people share is much more powerful than what keeps them apart. For better or for worse. All people are inescapably interconnected, and the more you come together to solve our problems, the better off we will all be. And with a clear mind and resolve you can become more open to this connection.’

‘Ok, but then what?’ Abe asked both intrigued and annoyed. ‘We are socially distancing. Have you heard of the term? How can we come together by socially distancing ourselves? No hugs, no kisses, no handshakes, no touching. It’s suffocating. I’m crying inside because of it. It’s unhealthy.’

‘Then call it something else. Call it physical distancing. You can still connect with people. People help each other through this. You are all in this together. You are products of nature, although humankind has come to view themselves as far superior to the other species. But I think a situation like this shows that you aren’t. Collectively you need to wake up to find you need each other to move forward and break the walls between you. That is your task. Connect and find ways to lift other people’s spirits. Even if it’s just one. Keep the light of the earth alive.’

‘How do I do that when I’m stuck at home?’

‘Start by allowing yourself to feel compassion for others. As helpless as you may feel stuck inside your home, there are always things you can do. Now is the time to help others even though you don’t know who they are or where they are. But because of your actions, you can make a difference. You don’t have to change the world. Do something small. Help a friend who’s in financial trouble. Listen to someone else who feels anxious. Don’t overreact in the supermarket when people are slow or think you’re standing too close. Smile at them. Be patient. They’re going through their issues too.’

Abe felt the words of the girl Moon wash over him like a nice warm bath, a bath so fresh with insight that for the first time in his life he did not pity himself. He wasn’t alone. Well, at least in spirit. The entire world was going through the same thing. Struck down by fear, paralyzed even, only to fall and then stand up and rise again. He felt a new determination running through his veins. He needed to help people to see and feel what he had just felt.

Moon smiled at him and gathered that Abe was changing in front of her eyes.

‘Let it all go. Let yourself go. Whatever you’re experiencing, always think: this too shall pass,’ Moon said. ‘There is only one certainty: I will always be here in the universe fulfilling my duty around your world at night. Tomorrow I will be there, and the day after that, and after that… You seem to know what you must do. Overcome adversity with resilience. Help out and use your time well.’

Abe saw another star fall and wondered how many years ago that had happened. When he accepted what the girl with the bright white hair asked of him, he closed his eyes. A strange force pulled his body from the moon back to earth. It happened so fast, he only blinked twice. Just as he thought he was going to be catapulted into the ground and end up in human pieces, he was softly stopped and put on the ground, feeling light as a feather.