Everything is a bit serious right now. You might be dealing with kids who cry more easily, or who don’t want to face their school work. Perhaps you don’t feel much like facing it either! I’ve been homeschooling and working from home for a while now, so it’s not such a big adjustment for us, but we miss our friends and family. It’s been a struggle to laugh as much as we used to.

You can try to cheer up with stand-up comedy shows and funny YouTube clips, but it’s in our social interactions with others where we laugh the most, not when our faces are illuminated by a screen.

Laughter is not just the best medicine

For a long time, it was thought that kids laugh more than adults. There was a fact floating around that kids laughed 300 times a day. It seems that idea is a myth.

In truth, how much we laugh appears to be more about how much time we spend interacting with others, rather than our age.

Some studies even suggest adults laugh more than children. We don’t lose our sense of humor when we become parents. Some of us, in fact, become sillier!

We can use that silliness to our advantage. Most people know that laughter is good for your health, but we don’t often think about how it can help our parenting.

Silliness and playful parenting can cut short tantrums, shake teens out of a grump, and prevent behavior problems before they even start.

We all yell at the kids sometimes

A few years ago, I was struggling with a health issue and the pressures of homeschooling, dealing with young kids 24/7, and working felt overwhelming.

My patience was minimal and, for some strange reason, kids always behave worse when you’re in a bad mood.

I’m not a big yeller, I know it’s never that effective, but pretty soon I was doing it anyway. My kids got full-blown, long, loud lecturers. For a bit it worked, they cleaned their rooms, stopped annoying their sister — but our relationship was suffering, and I hated how angry I felt most days.

I needed a different approach: enter Robot Mom.

No such thing as too silly

I’ve always let my kids pick their own study topic for school. My youngest decided she wanted to know more about robots. We were a few weeks in to our robot unit and an activity came up — pretending to be robots and “programming” each other to do simple tasks.

She programmed her big sister to make a milkshake, giving each instruction as carefully as she could. “Reach out your arm. Wrap your fingers around the fridge handle. Pull it open.”

Sometimes she’d forget to give a command. “Pour the milk,” she said. “No, stop! Stop pouring! That’s too much!!!” We spent the afternoon in hysterics.

I saw how the kids responded to the game and it gave me an idea.

Hiring a robot nanny

I announced that I’d bought a new robot to help around the house. I went into the hallway and came out pretending to be a robot. “I’m. ro-bot. mom,” I said. “Time. to. clean. up.” They laughed, and then — without the slightest fuss — started cleaning up their toys.

I felt like I’d unlocked some secret parenting hack!

Robot mom turned up to help make snacks, ask for chores to be done, announce bed time. Every time, the kids giggled their heads off and then… cooperated. I felt calmer, they laughed more. We all had fun and the yelling disappeared!

Robot mom was retired after a few months, but the silliness stayed. Of course, none of us are perfect parents and I’ve certainly lost my cool and yelled since then, but things are generally much calmer at our house. It set up a family culture that was kinder, more cooperative, and playful.

If you’re feeling stressed, your patience is wearing thin, and the kids are in a grump, try something silly. Laughter might be exactly what your family needs right now.