Regular Exercise Boosts Immunity

A new review highlights the immune boosting power of daily exercise (even for those in lockdown because of COVID-19).

Photo by Content Pixie on Unsplash

The novel coronavirus got you down? Being in isolation without access to my gym has not stopped me from getting in some regular activity, and it should not stop you either.

Today, we look at a recent review from the University of Bath (England), suggesting that regular, daily exercise can play an important role in helping you to maintain a healthy immune system.

Background

While exercise immunology is considered a relatively new area of scientific endeavor, with ninety percent of papers published after 1990. Still, some of the earliest studies fo back over a century ago. For example, in 1902, Larrabee provided evidence that changes in white blood cell differential counts in Boston marathon runners paralleled those see in certain disease conditions.

One may conveniently divide scientific discoveries into distinct time frames. The earliest exercise immunology studies (1900–1979) focused on exercise-induced changes in basic immune cell counts and function.

A tool known as flow cytometry defined the time from 1980 through 1989. The AIDS (human immunodeficiency virus-induced) era. One marker for the diagnosis of AIDS was the CD4 antigen on helper T-cells of the immune system. To measure this, researchers needed an instrument known as a flow cytometer. As the instruments became more available, investigators began to use them in exercise immunology research.

From 1990 through 2009, investigators turned their focus more to nutrition aging, and inflammation. Over the last decade, many have looked at personal nutrition and exercise guidelines, clinical outcomes, and genomic approaches.

Photo by CDC on Unsplash

Over the last four decades, investigators have examined how exercise can affect the human immune system. For example, a brief review published in the Journal of the American Medical Association for the 1984 Olympic Games in Los Angeles concluded that:

There was no clear experimental or clinical evidence that exercise will alter the frequency or severity of human infections… Further studies will be needed before it can be concluded that exercise affects the host response to infection in any clinically meaningful way.

There is now consensus that regular moderate intensity exercise helps with immunity. Still, some have advanced the argument that more strenuous exercise might suppress immune system functioning. This in turn might create an “open window” of higher risk for infection in the hours and days after exercise.

The authors of the current study, Dr. John Campbell and Dr. James Turner, addressed this theory in 2018. In their review article, they offered that the theory had no good evidence to support it. They furthermore concluded that exercise is beneficial for immune function.

Here is their argument: In the short term, exercise can help the immune system locate and neutralize pathogens. Longer term, regular exercise slows down aging-related immune system negative changes, which reduces the risk of contracting an infection.

Current article

In a new article, leading experts (including the aforementioned Dr. Turner and Campbell) debated whether the immune system changes negatively or positively post-exercise, and whether athletes were more prone to getting infections than the general population. Here is the conclusion of the published piece:

There is very limited evidence for exercise directly increasing the risk of becoming infected with viruses. In the contest of coronavirus, the most important consideration is reducing your exposure to others who may be carrying the virus. But people should not overlook the importance of staying fit, active, and healthy during this period. The authors add:

Provided it is carried out in isolation — away from others — regular, daily exercise will help better maintain the way the immune system works — not suppress it.

Photo by Jad Limcaco on Unsplash

My Take

Acute exercise appears to be an immune system booster that improves defense activity and metabolic health. The available data points to an inverse relationship between moderate intensity exercise and illness risk.

Basic science studies point to exercise having an anti-inflammatory influence through multiple pathways, although the mechanism is not particularly well-elucidated.

Regular moderate intensity aerobic exercise, such as walking, running, or cycling is recommended. Aim for 150 minutes per week. While longer, more vigorous exercise would not be harmful, if capacity to exercise is limited due to a health condition, the takeaway message is to move more (where possible), and that something is better than nothing. In addition, resistance exercise can help you maintain muscle, which in turn can help with movement.