Everyone decides to try running at some point and a lot of us start by hightailing it down to the local park with our canine coaches in tow. I’m all for getting our increasingly-sedentary pups out and about but here’s how to get more mileage out of your mutt when it comes to running.

Photo by Magdalena Smolnicka on Unsplash

Can my Dog Run?

This is an easy question, yes. The important question is SHOULD my dog run regularly? Most dogs, with correct training, can run regularly — and benefit from it. Though there are some reasons to think twice about running with your dog:

Does your dog have a flat face?

Pugs, French bulldogs and other breeds with flat noses struggle with intense exercise because their soft palate can cover their windpipe, which affects temperature regulation and their ability to breathe. This doesn’t bode well for a successful middle-distance running career.

Is your dog overweight?

I don’t want to discourage anyone from starting an exercise program for their overweight pet but a pinch of common sense goes a long way. Overweight dogs can get injured if they’re forced into intense exercise straight from a lifetime of protecting the couch from all comers. Their joints cannot take the load the exercise inflicts on them and the extra pounds of fat can make them overheat. Remember, dogs get heat stroke too.

However, with dietary changes and a progressive exercise regime, your portly pooch could become run-ready in a matter of months.

Pre-existing injuries

If your dog has previously injured themselves or has a genetic condition, such as hip or elbow dysplasia, long-distance running isn’t a great idea Other low impact activities that might interest them include swimming or obedience work.

Is your dog old enough?

Growth plates in medium to large breed dogs do not close until about 18 months of age. Until then, high-impact repetitive exercise is a no-no unless you want to be dealing with arthritic changes or hip/elbow dysplasia in your three year old dog.

Basic Training

Obedience

There are a few obedience bases that your dog should have down before you both hit the trails. You don’t want to lose an arm if they see an unexpected squirrel. Walking to heel and not straying into your path is the main one. It’s good if you have vocal commands that tell your dog when to speed up or slow down too, just in case of a shoelace malfunction or an interesting pile of fox poo.

Increasing fitness

The Couch to 5k app was invaluable when I was training my small dog, Bing, to run with me. The program gradually increases the running time, which is the best way to train them, and the walk intervals give you an opportunity to work on the speed change commands. Simply yell your word of choice when you start the running intervals and the opposite when you slow for the walking break.

Distance

It’s not a good idea to go much further than 5km if your dog isn’t a natural athlete, even when they’re fit. Most breeds just aren’t cut out for longer jogs. Also, giant breeds are just as easily tired out as the smaller guys so rein in that mastiff, they don’t need 10km, five is lots.

Speed

Try and match your running speed to their “normal” walking pace. If you’re not sure what that is, bring them somewhere off-leash and see what speed they prefer when checking out the sniffs. In general, it is our jogging pace. Galloping along also increases joint load, so we want a brisk trot, just keeping pace.

Running gear

A good leash — for the love of God, I don’t mean a flexi-leash — and some poo bags are all you need to get started. As you progress you can get some pretty handy running belts but I’ve found for training you need to have a more secure link between you and your pup.

Tips and tricks

Rest days

Your dog needs them too. I run with Bing twice a week, on off days we still go for long walks at a gentle pace. He gets his opportunity to sniff and explore on those.

Run days

I run with my dog at cooler times of the day. He goes for a potter around the block in the morning on days we run to go to the toilet so we don’t have to make too many unexpected stops. If your dog has a playdate or agility session arranged, reschedule your run. Too many high energy activities in a day increase their risk of injury.

More injury prevention

I give my dog a high quality joint supplement. It isn’t cheap but it’s worth it to prolong the years we run together. Your local vet clinic can point you in the right direction to clinically-proven supplements that maintain and strengthen joints.

Your dog shouldn’t be stiff after a run. They can be tired but if they have any problem getting up or moving, it’s a sign that they’ve done too much. Similarly if there’s any hint of pain, breathing difficulty or tiredness while you run, you stop IMMEDIATELY.

If you think your dog has overdone it, call your vet. If they get injured, rest them for 2–3 days, then on-leash walks only for at least another week. Reconsider whether running is the best form of exercise for your pooch, taking into account the advice of your veterinarian.

Photo by Sherise . on Unsplash

Running with my dog has been a great way to up both of our exercise levels without having to dedicate more time to it. It adds variety to his schedule and, I’m not going to lie, the little guy is developing serious muscle mass. Keeping his fitness levels up and his weight down is only going to give us more years of adventures together. And at the end of the day, that’s what we all want from our canine buddies.

This article includes some affiliate links which myself and Bing may make a small commission off if you buy. Gotta get that kibble in the bowl somehow!