Photo by Rob Curran on Unsplash

Alex and Olivia exit the tube station and slip into the crowd at Oxford Circus.

‘Take Goodfellas, for example,’ Alex says. He can smell the sun baking the tarmac. ‘Henry Hill works his way into the cabstand as a teenager. Doing odd jobs, parking Cadillacs, running errands. He’s nestled at the tete of the mob.’

Olivia gives him a look and smirks. They weave around an elderly couple looking startled and small amongst the mass of commuters on their way to work. Their newly fitted chips blink red in the papery skin on their wrists.

‘Before you know it, he’s filling cars with petrol and blowing them up on their command,’ Alex carries on. ‘And it escalates into assault, drugs, money laundering, extortion, even murder. But can he really be held entirely responsible when he’s essentially been raised by people whose currency is violence? He doesn’t know any better.’

Alex notices that Olivia’s eyes have drifted to two police officers across the crowd. Their hats disappear and reappear over a sea of bobbing heads. She presses the button on the left-hand side of her headset, so thin and discrete within her dark hair that it can’t be seen.

Alex does the same and they both look down for a moment to conceal themselves. Through the translucent static buzzing over his eyes, Alex looks at his walking feet. Shadows of legs on the pavement are interspersed with slivers of sunlight. The filter over his face changes.

They both raise their heads again and the police are out of sight. Olivia’s face has changed from an almost perfectly symmetrical oval-shaped face with green eyes to an angular face, dusted with freckles and adorned with blazing blue eyes. She looks back at him to resume the conversation.

‘The first line of his narration is literally “As far back as I can remember, I always wanted to be a gangster”,’ Olivia says. ‘I’m not saying he’s completely beyond some kind of redemption but he affiliated himself with the mafia from adolescence because he wanted to. He became one of their own because he worked for it.’

Alex drifts into a side-on walk to avoid a plump man in a suit. He glides back to Olivia’s side.

‘Granted, he was attracted to that life,’ Alex says. ‘I’m not saying he’s innocent, far from it. In fact, he may be the worst one of the lot.’

When they reach Caffè Nero, Alex spots Jonathan’s black curly hair. They make eye contact. Jonathan presses the shift button on his headset. Both Olivia and Alex carried on maneuvering through the crowd.

‘Worse than Tommy DeVito?’ Olivia said. ‘He beat a man to death in his friend’s club because the guy made a joke about him shining his shoes.’

Feeling that Jonathan is getting closer, Alex keeps his arms limp and relaxed but opens his right hand. He feels the two shiny pieces of black plastic, half the size of a credit card, being slid onto his palm. He passes one to Olivia and she folds her hand around it.

‘Oh, come on, now,’ Alex says. ‘That was a deliberate show of disrespect. Tommy had a reputation to uphold. He couldn’t very well let Billy Batts away with slandering him in front of his friends, made man or not.’

‘So, it’s justified?’

Overhead, a huge CCTV billboard shows a mirror view of the street below. Alex spots himself and Olivia, two small moving figures in a mass of people. The crowd moves on the screen like grass in the wind.

‘We’re getting away from the point I was trying to make,’ Alex says. ‘That scene in Tommy’s mum’s house, after they’ve beaten and stabbed Billy Batts and unbeknown to them he’s still writhing in the boot. Jimmy Conway and Tommy sit at the dinner table with Tommy’s mum, laughing and joking, gorging on her food. But Henry just sits there, quiet. He doesn’t speak. He just listens to them. Don’t you think that’s a bit suspect?’

A face from the crowd is selected and pulled up on the right-hand side of the CCTV board. A red line moves over the face of the middle-aged red-faced man and scans his eyes. In seconds, the random citizen’s name, hometown, age and height appear next to his face. The word CLEAR appears in green.

‘Maybe he wasn’t able to act normal,’ Olivia says, ‘knowing they’d just killed a man and were borrowing his friend’s mum’s knife to finish the job if need be, pretending it was to put an injured deer out of its misery.’

‘I think we both know that’s not true,’ Alex says. ‘He was just as callous and capable of murder as them. At what point in the film is there any indication that he feels guilt?’

The chatter of the crowd gets louder, crackling around them like white noise.

Olivia’s unnatural pale blue eyes look up to Alex.

‘What’s your point?’

‘My point is,’ he says, ‘him sitting there, listening intently. It’s suspicious, creepy. And maybe it foreshadows what he was going to do.’

A bellowing preacher is standing on a plinth and waving a Bible outside a department store. His voice rises and falls in volume as they pass him.

‘How’d you mean?’ Olivia asks.

‘Maybe he was collecting information,’ Alex says. ‘Mentally storing all gruesome details he would later give to the police, so he could rat out all his friends and save himself.’

Olivia unfolds her hand and rubs the black plastic card against her jeans. Holding it between her thumb and forefinger, she grazes it over her chip. A second later, the blinking red light flashes blue, then back to red, then disappears altogether as the data scrambles.

Alex does the same, feeling a tingling, electric current ripple from his wrist through his body. The same sensation pulses through Olivia and her eye twitches for a moment.

‘My problem with that is,’ Olivia says, ‘I don’t think Henry, or any of them for that matter, ever believed there was a possibility of them doing serious time. They would taunt the FBI, chap their car window to wake them up during stakeouts and invite them to follow them on joyrides.’

‘I agree they were all arrogant enough to believe they were above the law, no doubt about it,’ he says. ‘But don’t you think there were signs that Henry was always capable of being a rat?’

‘Like when?’ Olivia said. ‘The first time he gets arrested, he could’ve ratted them out. He was a teenager, as well. He could’ve told the police everything and then told the crew that he was scared, didn’t know what else to do. He might have even got away with it at that age. But he said nothing.’

A red double-decker bus stops to their right and dozens of people pour out of it onto the pavement.

‘When he gets older though,’ Alex says, ‘when he starts dealing drugs against Paulie’s wishes, disrespecting him, going behind his back, not paying tribute to him with a cut of the takings. And then when things get tense between Jimmy and Henry, in the diner when Jimmy asks him to do a hit. Henry knows if he did the job, he wouldn’t come back alive.’

They pass by a digital signage display outside a supermarket. On the pixelated screen, the head of the Metropolitan police is addressing a pack of journalists. He is appealing for information on a group of individuals intercepting government surveillance and facial recognition technology.

With a stern face, he warns that these individuals pose a great threat to national security and the safety of the public. Chaotic headlines flash and scroll across the screen. They both bite back a smile as they pass, quickening their pace through the crowd.

‘I don’t know if it’s fair to use the latter stages of the film as a sign that Henry was predestined to be a rat,’ Olivia says. She takes a piece of gum out from her pocket and puts it in her mouth. ‘It was clear Jimmy didn’t trust him anymore. Well, he didn’t trust anyone anymore. People were getting whacked left, right and centre. When it comes to fearing for your own life, knowing that it wouldn’t take much for your lifelong best friend to murder you with a smile, I don’t think anyone could be blamed for becoming an informant and going into witness protection.’

They squeeze through a particularly tight horde of passersby and resume their swift pace. A woman holding a baby close to her chest with one hand is about to pass Olivia.

Olivia glances at the woman’s free hand, tense by her side. As she gets closer, Olivia grazes the card along the chip on the woman’s free wrist. The woman looks up at her. She makes eye contact with Olivia for a moment before being swept away in the stream of bodies moving around them. Olivia smiles.

‘But in the context of the society they’ve created,’ Alex says, ‘it’s the worst possible thing he could’ve done. So disloyal, disrespectful. If he played by those rules all his life, if he truly was a “goodfella”, he would’ve died before he talked. But he showed his true colours at the end. He was only ever out for himself.’

Olivia notices another two police officers down the street to the left. She gives a subtle nod to Alex and they both switch their filters again. This time Olivia has a red-cheeked face and slightly hooded eyelids. Alex’s new face is milky pale and dimpled.

‘But you don’t think he’s beyond redemption?’ Alex carries on. ‘When he’s a coldblooded killer, a violent man, a thief, a drug dealer and a rat into the bargain. How can he be redeemed? What redeeming qualities are there? Name one character he never screws over.’

‘I’m not saying I’m justified in rooting for him,’ Olivia says. ‘But I want him to get away. You spend the whole film with this guy, seeing everything through his eyes, narrated by his voice. It’s a chronicle of his life. Didn’t you want him to get away?’

‘No, of course I did,’ Alex says. ‘I even rooted for Tommy DeVito.’

Alex takes the opportunity as a slender, slicked-haired man walks past and taps the plastic card against his wrist. He catches a glimpse of the chip bleeping in confusion. Alex smiles to himself knowing the stranger’s personal details, location tracker, internet search history, criminal record and even his darkest secrets have just fizzled away into the ether.

They slide around people, moving in the crowd like shadows, tapping on the wrist of every passerby they can manage to reach. Alex wonders how many the others from the group have managed to erase so far.

They turn a corner and slink into a denser crowd, feeling countless arms brush up against theirs.

Alex touches his left earlobe and Olivia nods.

They break away from the sea of people and slip into an alleyway. The buzz of the city softens as they leave it behind but it still rang in their ears. They slow their pace. They can both finally breathe and relax, away from the direct glare of the blazing sunlight.

‘He’s not a killer, you know,’ Olivia says.

‘What?’ Alex asks through deep breaths. He can feel the adrenaline flushing through his veins.

Olivia turns her filter off and her face goes back to normal. She stretches her mouth open wide like she’s just peeled off a face mask.

‘Henry Hill,’ she says. ‘He never actually kills anyone. He’s an accessory to murder for Jimmy and Tommy, and he’s more than capable of violence. But he never delivers the fatal blow.’

Alex stops and there is a moment of quiet.

‘Look at the murder of Billy Batts,’ Olivia says. Her voice clear and almost lyrical. It bounces softly against the cold walls of the alley. ‘Henry stands there and watches them do it. It’s like he’s in shock, disgust even. Maybe he is different from the rest of them, to a degree at least.’

They start walking again, making their way through the carefully mapped maze back to the base.

Alex searches his memory of the film. He realises that Olivia is right. Henry Hill wasn’t a murderer.

The high walls pull in around them and the alley narrows.

The base is in sight now and Alex and Olivia look at each other. They sped up almost to the pace of a run. A giddy excitement bubbles up in the form of nervous laughter.

As they turn left into a tighter alley where the sunlight struggles to squeeze in, patchy darkness drops over their eyes. From behind, black cloth bags are pulled over their heads.

The force of being pulled back is sharp like running into a taught piano wire, throat first. They choke and splutter.