She Rejected Their Reality

The price was too high.

Photo by Taisiia Shestopal on Unsplash

Lori slid the note under Becca’s social studies book, eyes focused on Mr. Andrews droning on about the Revolutionary War.

Half an hour later, Becca succumbed to curiosity. Andrews was deep into his lecture, spraying the eighth graders in the front row with enthusiastic declarations.

Becca opened the note on her lap, doodling squiggles in her notebook to make it look like she was paying attention.

Becca, Today, with your hair down and shiny, you look so pretty. And you could be beautiful if you wore makeup. If you stopped using big words all the time, no one would feel dumb around you and you could get a boyfriend. Call me tonight at 7:30 and we can talk about it. And you can come over my house on Saturday for a sleepover with everyone. Luv, Lori Hilary & Kayla & Meg

Becca coughed to cover up her shock. The popular girls thought she was pretty! And their leader wanted her to sleep over on Saturday.

This note changed everything. Purple-inked loops promised her a totally different life, one where she didn’t have to pretend it was okay she had no one to sit with at lunch and she didn’t care that no one would be her lab partner. She’d be one of the cool girls and everyone would like her.

Her heart zinged the whole bus ride home. Homework done, she helped her mother make dinner, setting the table without being told, and washing the dishes with her bratty little sister as if they got along.

At 7:30, she picked up the phone. She looked in her bedroom mirror for a minute and took a deep breath. If you stared into a mirror that was reflected in another mirror and kept on looking at the reflections, would you go crazy?

At 7:35, she shook herself out of her daydream. Time to make the call and fix her life. One last look in the mirror and she’d talk to Lori and hear what Becca had to do to fit in.

At 7:45, she was still looking into the mirror. If she concentrated really hard, she could make one eyebrow go up like a detective.

At 7:50, she shook herself to attention. Make the call, Becca. Say yes to your future. Her fingers hovered over the phone.

At 8:00, she was still staring at the phone. Her fingers refused to cooperate.

At 8:10, she admitted defeat. It was too late to call.

She’d blown it.

Now the cool girls would think she was a coward — or worse, that she didn’t want to be their friend.

The next morning, Becca put her stuff in her locker, lingering close to the cool girls. Lori flipped a blonde braid over her shoulder, leaned close to admire Hilary’s earrings. Kayla talked about her new boyfriend, her dark eyes promising a thrilling story. Meg nudged Kayla and they looked at Becca.

“You didn’t call,” said Lori.

They turned their backs and sashayed into the classroom. No one even looked at Becca the rest of the school day.

When everyone was getting ready to go home, Cindi sidled over to Becca’s locker. Becca’s breath caught with the joy of being seen.

“What did you do to them?” Cindi nodded at the cool girls flirting with the cool boys.

“Me?” Becca shrugged. “Nothing.” She zipped up her jacket, slammed her locker shut.

“Yeah,” said Cindi. “They can’t stand that. Come on, some of us are going to the candy store before we get the late bus.”

Becca’s mother spun from the stove when Becca walked in half an hour later than usual. “Where were you? I was worried sick!” She shifted the baby on her hip, beamed wonder at Becca’s bright eyes. “Are you eating…candy?”

“Yup,” said Becca. “We stopped at the candy store before we took the late bus.”

“We?” Her mother’s eyes widened. “You were with other people?”

“My friends.” Becca said. “I’m going to go do my homework.”

She dashed up the stairs, slamming the door to her bedroom. She opened her math book. Algebra never let her down, never made her feel invisible.

After she finished her homework and extra credit projects, Becca made the call that changed everything.

Cindi picked up on the first ring.

They talked about homework and projects, agreed that poetry should rhyme, and decided that Becca would have a sleepover at Cindi’s house on Saturday night.