Shelter-in-Place Chronicles: Spam in the Time of Corona

Why canned meat is worth fighting for

Homemade Spam musubis. Image: Margot Seeto

The San Francisco Bay Area’s COVID-19 shelter-in-place order has no doubt been a pressure cooker on relationships — be it with a significant other, roommates, children, or other family members. That said, my relationship with my boyfriend is usually strong. We communicate well and make time for each other. But tensions have been rising. Between his non-stop coronavirus conspiracy theories and my incessant eye rolling and devil’s advocate arguments — sometimes I wonder if we’re going to make it as a couple through the next few weeks.

Then there is the fact that I am a lover of all meats, and my boyfriend has been a vegetarian for nearly 20 years. This is usually the charming part about us as a couple. He doesn’t mind when I cook bacon or a burger at home. I don’t ridicule his vegetarianism and am happy to eat beans for dinner on most days. We laugh when servers give him the steak and me the quinoa salad (in pre-corona times, of course).

But then came the Spam.

My ability to freely consume Spam has become increasingly important to my Asian American identity as hate crimes against Asian Americans skyrocket in light of racist coronavirus fears.

Every time my boyfriend goes on a music tour, I go all Kevin McAllister a la “Home Alone” around the apartment. But instead of slapping aftershave on my face and screaming, I cook and order out vast amounts of salty meats (though I still scream — with joy). Especially salty Asian meats. I am always free to eat whatever I want in our apartment, as is my boyfriend. It’s just easier and more considerate to eat together as a couple at home, which means vegetarian. So it should not be surprising that the meat diary from my boyfriend’s last absence included the ramdon/chapaguri steak dish from the movie “Parasite,” a pepperoni-pineapple-jalapeño pizza, Korean fried chicken wings, beef kimbap, North Carolina-style barbecued chicken and ribs, Vienna sausage, bacon, and of course — Spam.

Let me count the ways I love Spam. My go-to hangover dish is kimchi-Spam ramen with a sunnyside-up egg and chopped scallions, drizzled with sesame oil and soy sauce. I love making kimchi-Spam fried rice when the kimchi jar is almost empty and I can pour the leftover juice over the rice while it’s frying. Spam and eggs with white rice, fresh tomatoes, and Tabasco-y ketchup is my breakfast jam. The Deluxe (deluxe!) Spam Musubi with egg and furikake is my favorite 7-Eleven snack in Hawai’i. I loved going solo to the annual Waikīkī Spam Jam to sample new and experimental Spam dishes (report: the now-failed Spam brand hot dog tasted like … a hot dog). I once happily ate a Spam fritter on a dare from a customer while bartending in London. The prankster had no idea that I loved the stuff.

This is by no means the first Spam missive written by an Asian American person. The nitrate-filled luncheon meat has been part of various Asian, Pacific Islander, and even British cuisines for decades, having been rationed by the American military during various occupations in the mid-20th century. As the Asian and Pacific Islander diaspora has grown, shelf-stable meat products such as Spam have made and morphed their way through generations of family recipes across the globe. And while I didn’t grow up with the same relationship to Spam as my Japanese American, Korean American, and Filipino American friends, it was still part of my childhood. I think my Chinese American father’s many years doing Army Reserve kitchen patrol during the Vietnam War etched in him a love of canned meat. There is always a case (or two) of Spam in my parents’ pantry. My Asian American friends and I have cooked Spam together and enjoyed it at a level that few outside our food cultures understand. Asian American chefs our age have proudly put Spam on their innovative restaurant menus. As Spam has become a ubiquitous and uniting ingredient in an emerging genre of Asian American cuisine, it has also become an integral part of a pan-Asian American socio-political identity.

I need to feel powerful in a time when so many of us feel powerless.

So there I was in the apartment that my boyfriend and I have shared harmoniously for a year-and-a-half. “I’m going to cook Spam,” I declared. It was more of a warning, not an apology. This was the second time I was going to cook the cube-shaped meat since the shelter-in-place order. The first time I made it, my blue-eyed boyfriend moved to another room and put on a face mask I bought during the California wildfires two years ago. He also demanded that I bring him some incense. I begrudgingly agreed and found a stub of palo santo, then lovingly fried my one piece of Spam into a crispy, golden-brown rectangle of goodness. “It smells like puke,” my boyfriend said. I rolled my eyes. I refused to give into feelings of shame from the clichéd, yet still stinging, Asian American childhood experiences of being shunned for “bad” or “weird” smells coming from our lunch boxes. “Can you wait to cook it until I’m out? Do you want Spam to ruin our relationship?,” asked my boyfriend, as he continued to push the issue. And while I knew he was asking the favor from a vegetarian standpoint, and not so much a racist one, I also did not want to give in to typical female overaccommodation for a male partner. There seemed to be a lot at stake for me in this moment, both culturally and gender-wise. In short — I cooked the Spam. He retaliated by smoking a spliff, knowing that I hate the smell of indoor tobacco. We isolated ourselves in separate rooms for the rest of the day. I wrote this essay.

Spam is more than a cabin fever fight for me. It is more than an issue of meat eater versus vegetarian. My ability to freely consume Spam has become increasingly important to my Asian American identity as hate crimes against Asian Americans skyrocket in light of racist coronavirus fears. Asian American organizations across the country have rushed to launch a reporting center for those who have experienced discrimination and attacks in this current reality.

Even the Federal Bureau of Investigation predicts that hate crimes against Asian Americans will continue to increase as growing segments of the population erroneously assume that those who look Chinese automatically carry and transmit COVID-19. Eating Spam is a community identity symbol for me as much as it is comfort food. Food is political. Access to the food you want is a privilege. Getting to eat it is powerful. I need to feel powerful in a time when so many of us feel powerless.

I love my boyfriend dearly. I hope our relationship will be OK. But I hope that in reading this, he understands why I can’t — and won’t — give up my Spam.