Written by Ranjan Manohar

Freedom. Exhilaration. Fun.

Flight?

This might have been what some people thought in the 18th century when they looked up and observed beautiful birds soaring in the sky. The thought of taking to the skies was too gripping to write off. They wondered what it would be like if they, and as a consequence we, could fly.

Fewer birds in the sky is what it would be like, if you ask me.

A rough infographic of people behind flight, complete with nicknames. Graphic made by Goutham Manoharan.

But the drive of people back then well surpassed my love for wildlife. They said “Let’s take to the air!” and actually went on to achieve it. One might think it was the Wright Brothers who did it first, where in fact it was actually the Montgolfier brothers, who used what we now know as the “hot air balloon” to fly 5 miles in Paris.

The Montgolfier hot air balloon. Image from National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution.

Then what was the whole deal with the Wright Brothers? Why are they accredited to achieving flight? Well, they were the first to achieve powered, controlled, heavier than air flight. Lots of words. Time to explain.

Though hot air balloons were discovered as a viable way to explore what lay off the soil, it quickly dawned that they were not a very practical solution. They lacked range, proper control and were unsafe as even a small gust of wind could drive them awry as they were “lighter than air”. And thus the race to design a flight that could sustain itself in the air (independent of power provided during take-off), have basic control, not lose airspeed mid-flight and more or less maintain flight path began.

Immediately, a problem arose. Since people back then observed birds, they naturally tried to mimic the way they achieved flight. Some very early attempts to fly consisted of ornithopters, which had contraptions to make the wings flap. The lift generated by this was not nearly enough and hence, these mechanical birds failed miserably.

A flying machine designed by Leonardo Da Vinci. Image from National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution.

If a modern airplane is observed, something very obvious stands out- the wings aren’t flapping or rotating. Though it may seem like a very trivial thing to our eyes, it was a very significant separation at the time — the separation of propulsion and control. This separation was made by a man named Cayley. In a very significant triple research paper, he proposed two main aspects of modern flight:

Fixed wings to generate lift, with horizontal and vertical stabilizers to control it. A “cambered” or curved surface placed at an angle to oncoming air generated lift. It also generated more of the aforementioned lift as opposed to a flat surface.

Cayley’s Silver Disc. Image from Science and Society Picture Library.

He was the first to test these airfoils using a whirling arm apparatus to act as a wind tunnel substitute. He continued to do a lot more, although after a small break. He realized that to lift a heavier weight, he needed to generate more lift. Since the material science at the time was not advanced enough to make wingspans long enough to lift a bigger payload, he introduced bi and tri-plane designs. He also made technical advances by means of the dihedral angle, rudder and elevator¹.

Dihedral Angle. Image from Wikipedia, edited by Ranjan Manohar for clarity.

Clearly, Cayley was an intellectual invested in achieving flight in any way possible. He built and flew gilders to get a ‘feel’ for the air and flying. During his break, he is also believed to have experimented with airships. However, Henri Giffard is better known for this particular bit of aviation history.

The Henri airship. Image from National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution.

George Cayley did not get much recognition despite introducing many modern concepts of flight to the world back in the day. His close follower William Samuel Henson brought Cayley’s vision to life with some concept airplanes propelled by steam engines and propellers. Mind you, they were never actually built. Despite this, Henson’s illustrations gained a lot of media attention and immortalized Cayley’s vision. Henson also contributed by figuring out that the leading edge generated the most lift in an airfoil and that long, slender wings were better for greater lift.

William Henson’s Ariel Steam Carriage. Image from Wikimedia.

It became obvious to future historians that Cayley was a man of rare intellect when the next significant contribution to aviation came only around half a century later with another man Otto Lilienthal. He too, like Cayley, wanted to get a feel of the air before fitting any kind of propulsion system in. He built and flew over 2500 gliders to achieve this, and recorded some significant aerodynamic data that the Wrights would use in the future. He was fondly referred to as the ‘glider man’ by future aviation enthusiasts.

Otto Lilienthal. Image sourced from National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution.

Technically speaking, everyone mentioned thus far were responsible for the Wrights to achieve successful flight. But, they also had some others giving them some resources and a push to do what they did on that red-letter day for aviation.

The two gentlemen that gave them these were Octave Chanute and Samuel Pierpont Langley. The Wrights were American, and aviation in America hadn’t picked up till then because of a little thing called independence which led to political blockades. Octave Chanute’s primary contribution was that he was the first well known American aviation historian who compiled a lot of data which enabled the Wrights to delve deep into the world of flight. It is also believed that they were close friends. Samuel Pierpont Langley is another story.

Langley’s most significant contribution was the swap from steam based to a light-weight gasoline based propulsion system. This came with the weight advantage that made heavier-than-air flight possible. Other than this, he was appointed by the government and allocated $50000 in funding to achieve flight. He came really close, but a structural problem prevented him from achieving flight before the Wrights. Two catastrophic test flights put an end to Langley’s dream while having the added benefit of attracting negative PR.

Despite Langley’s failure, the Wrights were inspired, because aviation had reached their shores and reached it in style. They did not have quality formal education, but encouraging parents and a highly creative mindset led them to achieve what people before them had not. The fact that a lot of groundwork existed before they achieved heavier than air flight should not water down the amazement, though. The Wright Brothers Wilbur and Orville were responsible for that final golden touch that came at the price of a lot of hard work.

They mimicked the Pratt Truss design from Chanute’s biplane glider, used horizontal and vertical stabilizers from Cayley’s designs, and tapped into the significant aerodynamic data from Otto Lilienthal’s findings. But before we get our togas in a twist and yell “copy cats!” much to the dismay of sleeping family members, they:

Designed their own little gasoline engine which weighed just about 91 kg for 12 HP. Built a wind tunnel to test airfoils. Corrected existing aerodynamic data using said wind tunnel as the revolving arm apparatus was lacking accuracy. Moved the horizontal stabilizer to the front of the airplane to act as a crash structure. Go go, safety! Designed the entire control schema for the airplane.

A Wind Tunnel. Image from Wikimedia.

The last point is the one with the most- shall I say- sex appeal. They invented a technology called “wing warping”² which is what it sounds like.

To achieve full aerial control, one must be able to control three aspects of the plane — roll, pitch and yaw.

Roll, Pitch and Yaw. Image from NASA.

In order to do this, the Wrights invented a system that would twist the wings of the plane using a system of pulleys. This in turn created a lift differential. The side of the wing that generated higher lift due to the resulting steeper angle of attack would rise, and the other side would fall to a corresponding degree, creating a force couple.

Angle of Attack. Image from Aviation Chief.

This was thought of by Wilbur Wright while observing the flight of a bird. The higher drag that comes with the increased lift caused an unnecessary yaw that was soon offset by using the rudder. This entire warping mechanism was controlled by- wait for it- the movement of the waist of the pilot!

They were in the end game now³. They had tested gliders. They had fitted the beautiful custom built engine. The final problem of uneven surfaces to take off from was solved by building a rail like system to keep the plane straight during take-off. And so it happened, on the 17th of December, 1903. On a good, windy morning in Kill Devil Hills, the Wright Flyer took to the skies, flew for 12 seconds at a staggering 10 foot altitude for 120 feet and the rest as they say is history.

The Wright Flyer. Image from Wikimedia.

Citations:

References and Further Reading: