For the past 2 years, the media has hyped at every moment possible how strong the economy is, how everyone who wants a job has a job, record unemployment, high stock market, and the greatest economy in the world. Yet, among all this fanfare, many things did not add up. Some of these are very general.

· Companies were allegedly more cash-rich than ever, yet wage growth was often stagnant, particularly among lower- and middle-income families.

· News articles that HR departments were desperate to find and train workers — because things were that good. However, most active job seekers could not get a reply or any interest.

· Funds constantly pouring into money-losing enterprises, particularly in the venture capital space.

Can you look back now and start to see that the picture was perhaps never as rosy as the world wanted you to believe?

Some economists wrote about some of these trends with far more data than I could come up with. Alan Kreuger, a former White House economist, and professor at Princeton was onto something. Where would you read these things? In obscure places like The Review of Economics and Statistics, ILR Review, the Russel Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences. Not exactly mainstream media. Some of his papers include “Understanding Trends in Alternative Work Arrangements in the United States” and “The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias: Will the Real Unemployment Rate Please Stand Up?” He was one of the few that tried to put the pieces together that something was not just right.

And then COVID-19 hit and here we are today with 2 unemployment reports driving the USA close to 10% unemployment. And some are forecasting that another 40,000,000 or more jobs will be lost bringing unemployment close to 30%.

I think it is safe to say that everyone believes and thinks that the USA and the world will get past this COVID-19 crisis. Exactly when and how may be uncertain, but eventually, the virus will subside, and businesses will re-open. Many reports call for peak virus to take place sometime in the next 2–4 weeks. And help is on the way in a big way — with many treatments advancing at remarkable speeds and the government swooping in with massive financial handouts to keep things afloat. So, why is 30% unemployment even being discussed?

It was already there — and probably a lot worse than that.

The USA workforce is about 164,000,000 strong and reports showed about 3% unemployment. Yet, the total USA population of ages 21–64, prime working ages is about 229,000,000. So, where are these 64,000,000 people that are not in the workforce?

Yes, some are disabled to the point of not being able to work, retired, off the grid — that is those that cannot or will not work. But not all 64,000,000. Not even close. How many? I just don’t know, but of the 64,000,000, it is probably a tiny number.

The 164,000,000-workforce number conveniently leaves out those that have given up looking for work, retired or just took themselves out of the game. I am a prime example of this. I am not counted in the 164,000,000. I keep busy and ‘work’ perhaps, but not in the fashion that I desire — earning a full-time position with a company. I cannot even get in the door. So, when the media says, ‘everyone that wants a job has a job’, that is simply not true. And there are others with me.

So, while the USA likes to boast about 3%, maybe the number was closer to 6%, to begin with. Then, take the people that were working and on the payroll of business but, well, not producing any value.

Yes, these stories abound. We have all heard stories of colleagues talking about their co-worker that earns a salary but does not really get anything done. Or if the co-worker were to leave, nobody would notice. These are some of the anecdotes that are overheard that per the hedge fund manager could be put into actionable data-driven insights.

For a larger example, can we calculate the number of employees that work at a permanent money-burning enterprise? Take Uber, 22,000 full-time employees (give or take) and over 5,000,000 independent contractor drivers. Uber speaks of achieving profitability in 2020 but still would post over $1,000,000,000 of losses for the year. Considering the drivers are really the cost of goods sold, so they can be excluded from the calculation. The drivers due get paid, but directly out of revenue produced. On average, Uber pays each of its full-time employees about $100,000 per year. And all 22,000 of these people are working their tails off to lose $1,000,000,000. That means, every day each employee is contributing $45,000+ of losses to the company for 2020.

The word employment and work are two very different things. It’s a lot of ‘work’ to cut your tree branches down or redecorate your house, but you are not getting paid for those things or adding economic value. Employment inspires thoughts of utility and productivity. If you earn a salary of $100,000, it should be possible to identify that your $100,000 of salary is tied to at least $100,000 (and likely closer to $150,000+) of contribution margin production — perhaps defined as sales less all costs except salaries.

Are people at Uber working extremely hard? Yes, absolutely. I bet the office is loaded with extremely hard-working, talented and great people that are busting their tails and going the extra mile. Is it producing utility and value from an economic perspective? No. Maybe one day, as they say.

Think about these stories and how many people fall into one of these two categories or perhaps another one. There may be an argument that they were already unemployed, meaning they are not producing any value. Sure, a paycheck shows up every 2 weeks and keeps them on the employed counts for the sake of labor statistics, but no value is being produced. Of the 158,000,000 people that are ‘employed’ per the records, how many of those are propped up by jobs where no value is being produced from the position?

And this is where things have fallen apart. COVID-19 was a perfect time and a perfect weapon to expose various deadweight salaries that were being carried by corporations. A healthy company can survive and even thrive during tough economic times. An unhealthy one falls apart at the first sign of weakness and business slowdown. And this is what is happening right now.

The question arises — of the 158,000,000 or so on recent payrolls due to full-employment, how many were not producing any value for the enterprise? The number is nearly impossible to calculate, but it’s likely not insignificant. Could it be as high as 50%? Uber, for example, could break even by cutting 11,000 of its staff at an average of $100,000 per year. Does this suggest that the non-value producing rate of the workforce may have been closer to 20%-40% of the 164,000,000?

And what about the 64,000,000 counted out of the equation? Many are independent contractors, small business owners and other ‘hustle-focused’ entrepreneurs that each day that goes by must produce economic value in their own microcosm. There is no consuming a $1,000,000,000 or even a $1,000 annual loss to keep things going. Each day, most, if not all this group needs to bring in more funds than their underlying costs.

For now, with the massive stimulus, we are seeing a transition of the burden of sustaining the non-productive workforce from private enterprise to the federal government. Many firms that will receive CARES Act assistance are just perpetuating a broader issue — sustaining non-performing payrolls. This helps those receiving those paychecks a little longer but postpones the inevitable.

A better solution would be for enterprises sustaining underperforming payrolls and have eliminated those on their own well before the government had to step in. This may hurt some paid staff that were receiving periodic paychecks, but those let go would be forced to re-evaluate their individual value proposition or re-insert their talents into an environment that could translate into economic value for the enterprise.

The USA already had 30% unemployment. It’s just that many that were unemployed from a utility perspective were getting paid every 2 weeks, which allowed for buying homes, taking care of families and keeping the economic engine going. That is about to drastically alter the future of the USA.

The USA will never return to single-digit unemployment again. At least if we evaluate it from the current workforce figures. Companies that laid off 50 workers will rehire 30. Vanity positions that a company was aiming to hire will never be re-opened. Some businesses that are temporarily closed will not re-open. Some that were marginally successful prior to COVID-19 are likely not to survive past the 2 months they can continue to make payroll and get forgiveness.

The real unemployment will be masked by a workforce figure shift. The 164,000,000-workforce may dwindle to 130,000,000–140,000,000 which will make it look like the unemployment rate is declining. Instead of asking about the 65,000,000 of the ‘forgotten’, we will now be asking about 100,000,000 people that are the right age to work and have to work to pay expenses but do not count.

There will be more stimulus and financial relief packages. Prepare for more handouts from the federal government to perpetuate the false unemployment figures. The government is attacking the problem with $2 trillion of cash — about 10% of the USA's GDP. It will take more — mostly driven by the desire to keep people ‘working’ versus ‘employed’. It is unlikely the funds will go to where they should go — instead, focusing on trying to retain propped up employment figures by keeping people that produce no value within the construct they have been assigned.

There will have to be a new way to look at how we define ‘employment’ in this country and what it means for the overall economic health of our nation.