Stress-Free Self-Care for Single Parents

If the thought of engaging in self-care is causing you stress, read on to learn why it shouldn’t.

When you mention self-care, many single parents will roll their eyes. The first thing that comes to mind is massages, bubble baths, manicures and pedicures, and a myriad of other luxuries that single parents just don’t have time for. And yet, single parents might need self-care more than anyone else.

As a single parent, all the responsibility falls on you. You don’t have a partner to take over when you get sick or just need a moment to yourself. You have to do all the cooking, cleaning, homework help, bedtime stories, baths, errands, and work a full-time job (or two or three).

That’s a lot of stress, which is precisely what self-care can help to eliminate. Yet with all that on your plate, how on earth are you supposed to find time for self-care?

The answer is: you don’t.

It’s not about time

Self-care isn’t about finding time for yet another thing to do. It’s not about finding or making time for a face mask, a bubble bath, or a night out at the movies.

It’s about making sure your needs are met. Is it possible that one of those needs might be time? Sure, but you have plenty of other needs too. And that’s what self-care is about: all those needs.

“I don’t have time to worry about my own needs!” you might be saying.

Trust me, I get it. I’ve been there. Feeling like everyone else needs so much, and you are the only one who can meet those needs, and the only way to do that is to ignore your own needs.

But when you ignore your own needs, eventually you’re exhausted, burnt out, frustrated, stressed out, and ready to break. You’re starving, whether it’s for physical nourishment or something else.

Photo by Alexis Fauvet on Unsplash

What do you need?

Take a moment right now. Close your eyes, take a deep breath, and ask yourself: What do I need right now?

Maybe you need a break from cooking. So self-care tonight might look like ordering delivery for dinner.

Maybe you need a break from the household chores. So self-care might look like letting the clean clothes sit in a pile on the couch for a couple of days while you play with the kids, read a book, or watch Netflix.

Maybe you crave a chance to engage in a hobby you love but haven’t had a chance to do much lately. So self-care might look like sitting outside reading a book, knitting, or drawing while the kids ride their bikes.

Maybe what you need is a shower, so you toss the kids some snack crackers to tide them over while you take that shower before you make dinner.

You might go to bed early because you need more sleep. Or get up a few minutes early because you need time to do your makeup or drink a cup of coffee before getting the kids up.

Self-care can also be asking for help, hiring someone to do something you can’t or don’t want to do, and refusing to do something that you simply don’t have the time, interest, or desire to do.

The first step to self-care is asking yourself what you need.

It’s not one and done

Self-care is also not about meeting your needs just once and calling it done. Self-care is about learning to consistently meet your own needs.

Self-care is consistently checking in with yourself to see what you need and then taking steps to get that need met. That means self-care can be a daily thing. In fact, it can be done multiple times a day.

As a single parent, you are responsible for little lives. That’s a lot of responsibility resting on your shoulders. And it’s also exactly why making sure your own needs are getting met is so crucial.

The little lives that depend on you are depending on you not just meeting those needs, but to do so without practically killing yourself in the process.

Make it a daily habit to check in with yourself. You might do it first thing in the morning, around midday, and then around dinner. Set reminders on your phone if you need to.

Check in, ask yourself what you need and then determine what you need to do to get that need met.

Then do it.

Distinguish wants from needs

This may be a bit of a struggle because it’s easy for our wants to surface when we’re searching out our needs. So we start thinking about a bubble bath or manicure and then we have that argument with ourselves about how we don’t have time for it and therefore we don’t have time for self-care.

So it’s important to make sure you distinguish your wants from your needs. This isn’t to say you should ignore your wants. Keep those wants in mind and when you do have the time or money, indulge them — that’s also self-care!

But learning to distinguish your wants from your needs makes it easier to recognize the needs.

Photo by Michael Mims on Unsplash

Would you ignore one of your children’s needs?

If you’re still feeling stressed about self-care, let me ask you this: would you ignore one of your children’s needs? You might refuse to buy them a new video game, but would you refuse to take them to the doctor? Buy them clothes or shoes that fit properly? Feed them healthy and nutritious food?

Of course you wouldn’t. You would meet that need and if you couldn’t, you would figure out what you need to do to meet it.

You’re no less important than your children, despite what you might think or what others might tell you. In fact, in some ways, you’re more important. They need you to take care of them, and that means you need to take care of yourself.

Treat your needs the same way you would treat your child’s. That’s self-care.

And yes, it can really be that simple.