My last article discussed Setting Fitness Goals In Lockdown to help you direct your training for the next few months. Now that you have an idea of what you want to achieve over the next few months, I want to discuss some ideas to modify the training to make it work.

Frequency, intensity, time and type of training are the key training principles, conveniently referred to as the FITT principle. All changes to a training program involve altering one or more of these.

The FITT principle is interdependent and changes in one aspect lead to others.

An increase in intensity usually leads to a decrease in duration and/or frequency.

An increase in duration usually leads to a decrease in intensity and/or frequency.

An increase in frequency usually leads to a decrease in intensity and/or frequency.

This is pretty simple. If you want to run 10% faster than your current pace, it is unlikely that you will be able to maintain the same distance. So, you increase the pace and decrease the distance to begin and aim to increase it over time.

Let’s break down each component of the FITT principle to see how it can be adapted during lockdown. I am going to share some of the changes I have made to both my clients and my own training for the coming months.

Frequency

Many of my clients have increased their training from 3–5 to 6–7 sessions per week. The increased training frequency was driven by lifestyle factors instead of my programming, as exercising more frequently allows them to break up the day and spend more time out of the living room or office.

My clients who typically train in the gym are in the first week of their new home-based training programs so it is too early to establish how successful this approach has been. I am interested to see whether the people with home gyms, who have continued their existing programs, will want to increase their training frequency now that they are spending more time at home.

I am training twice per day. In the morning I do resistance training in my ad-hoc home gym or using gymnastics rings at the park. In the evening, I will go for an easy run, walk or bike ride.

I have always enjoyed starting the day with exercise and I wanted to maintain that routine. The evening cardio is a good way to physically remove me from the office and complete my workday. When I get back from that session, my workday is complete and I can move to other activities in the house, like not washing the dishes.

I am used to working from home and spending large amounts of time in my office. However, not being able to go out for dinner or see friends a few nights per week has begun to feel restrictive and I was getting a bit restless, but this new training program has helped.

Overall, increasing training frequency during lockdown is a good option for many people. This will assist you in developing a routine and help to ensure you aren’t stuck inside all day.

Intensity

The increased training frequency has been paired with a decreased intensity during some of the sessions. For some clients, I took the same work they were doing in 3–4 sessions and spread it over 5–6 sessions.

For others, we kept these sessions the same and added some additional cardio or mobility sessions into the training program.

The best approach will depend on the training environment. Less volume in the session can be great when equipment takes longer to set up, there is less weight available and people are keeping an eye on their children as they work out.

It’s going to be hard to ‘get in the zone’ for the next few weeks, or even months, with these challenges as well as the anxiety that many people are carrying about their health, family and work. I’m happy for people to get in and go through the motions for now, because any activity is better than none.

As people get used to their home training set up or add more equipment we may see an increase in their training intensity. For now, I am happy for people to be moving every single day and we can focus on ramping up intensity later on.

I have tried to replicate my typical training intensity during my gymnastic ring sessions, which has probably happened because of the additional challenge of trying to remain stable on those rings. The home gym session is more about going through the motions to keep mobile and target some of the areas that are hard to hit on the rings. I do my best to engage the muscle and use strict form, but the truth is that I’m barely breaking a sweat, which is OK for now.

My cardio sessions are mostly low-intensity, to begin with, and will increase over the coming months. I did try to ramp up the running pace a couple of times this week, but it was harder than I thought and it might take some time to get used to training in the evening.

Decreasing training intensity and increasing frequency seem like the best option for most of my clients and myself. There will be an inevitable decrease in training intensity as people get used to new training equipment, exercises and company.

You should be OK with a decreased intensity while you find your routine and get used to training from home. There is plenty of time to increase the intensity once a solid foundation has been laid.

Time (Duration)

My clients home training program sessions mostly clock in between 30–45 minutes, depending on their circumstances. This is the result of a higher training frequency and also less equipment to train with.

Most people with a gym membership don’t have a squat rack, dumbbells and an array of resistance training machines sitting in their garage. While we can replicate the movement patterns using what they have, this can mean a lot of new exercises in the program, so I’ve tapered back the volume while they get used to these movements.

Over the next few weeks, we will add in new movements to the training programs as people get more familiar with their exercises or add equipment to their home gyms. This will lead to an increased training duration.

My home and ring training sessions are a bit shorter than I would usually spend in the gym. However, I often have some cardio tacked onto my gym sessions, which is now being done separately. Overall, I am probably training for slightly longer than I usually do but at a lower intensity.

Type

My clients have maintained the same type of training they were doing before — a combination of resistance and endurance training. However, lockdown may be a good chance to vary the type of training being done, which ties in well with an increased training frequency.

Instead of cardio being 20-minutes on a treadmill at the end of a gym session 2–3 times per week, you could start running outside a few times per week. This will get you out of the house and hitting your cardio targets.

I think cycling will become more popular in the coming months, as it allows people to get outside to exercise and the roads will be more safe than usual. I have two clients with cycling currently in their training program, but that was the case before lockdown. I wouldn’t be surprised to see more people adding a bike to the repertoire over the coming months.

My training type is the same as it was before. As I sit here writing this, I am thinking I should add some yoga or pilates to my routine to mix things up. They would work well as a recovery session that I could do on Sunday, my current day off. Food for thought!

Getting started

Everyone will be different in the changes they make and the timeframe they allow to make them. For some people, it’s too early to be even worrying about fitness and the focus is on getting a routine in place. This is easy for me to forget, as my clients are literally paying for fitness ideas and they want to move quickly.

If you want to move more but don’t know where to begin, start out with some walking to get your body moving. I often refer to this as ‘accumulating minutes’ for new clients and our aim is to simply allocate time to exercise and none of the FITT principle matters.

Once you have a routine in place, you can start to incorporate some bodyweight training in addition to your walking and you will slowly develop your own training regime over the coming months.