The Coronavirus Forced Me to Come to Terms With My Asexuality

Or what it’s like to be asexual and navigate other intersections

Photo by maradon_333 in Shutterstock

I have debated writing this story ever since I started contributing regularly on this platform nearly nine months ago. Something always held me back from the fear of being judged to the fear of being misunderstood. But in the end, it’s the thought of me being inauthentic that gnaws at me because I’ve been hiding a part of myself for the longest time. I don’t feel that it’s fair for me to open up about my experiences of being a middle-aged Black woman and not have people know about all of me.

Recently, I listened to the song, “Freedom 90” by George Michael for the first time in a number of years. At first glance, the song has nothing to do with what I’m about to discuss as it was about his disillusionment with the music industry. But some of the lyrics really had me shook and struck a deep chord within myself. The lyrics in question are these:

“I think there’s something you should know

I think it’s time I stopped the show

There’s something deep inside of me

There’s someone I forgot to be

Take back your picture in a frame

Don’t think that I’ll be back again

I just hope you understand

Sometimes the clothes do not make the man.”

Yeah. So this is what I’ve been holding in the deep recesses of my soul:

I’m asexual. Many in the community call it ace for short.

And the continued lockdown in my state has forced me to start to come to terms with it.

The most basic definition of asexuality is the lack of sexual attraction to others or low or absent interest in or desire for sexual activity. The thing about asexuality that confuses many people is that it’s a broad spectrum, which I won’t get into as it would derail the point of my piece.

I had no idea that asexuality was even a thing until around 5 years ago when I had broken up with my last boyfriend. I wondered why after a few months, I still had no desire to enter into another relationship. A Google search led me to the AVEN site and upon perusing it, I found that the description of asexuality described me.

For most of that time, I took the information I gleaned from AVEN, locked it away, and didn’t examine it further. I didn’t want to accept it because it meant that it would marginalize me further. I already deal with racism and sexism every single day, intersections that are visible. I wasn’t out to most people because after having to defend my existence as a Black woman, I didn’t have the spoons to deal with yet another marginalized part of myself.

Another reason why I didn’t deal with my asexuality was that it wasn’t an integral part of my identity. It wasn’t an important part of my life. It still isn’t. No one can look at me and tell that I’m ace because that part of my identity is easily hidden, which gives me privilege over others in the LGBTQIA community. No one would ever know I was on the asexual spectrum unless I told them. And I rarely do tell, for reasons that I’m now about to get into.

I belong to a generation that came of age after the sexual revolution of the 1960s. I grew up with the heteronormative notion that a woman’s greatest accomplishment in life was being able to find a romantic partner. Sex was and still is regarded as a requirement for romantic relationships.

I started dating in high school but didn’t start having sex until I was in college. And frankly, I didn’t fully understand why people made it out to be this amazing, mind-blowing experience. I often found it uncomfortable and boring.

While I liked many of the men I dated and loved some of them, at least initially, I wasn’t sexually attracted to many of them either. A couple of the men I dated noticed my lack of enthusiasm for sex and would call me out on it but I usually reassured them that I was fine with it, even if I knew deep down that I wasn’t.

I didn’t have the language at the time to tell them that I wasn’t into sex and would rather go without it. I didn’t feel as if I had the agency to assert boundaries over my body. As a result, I would have sex many times when I didn’t want to because it was something that I was supposed to do in order to have a relationship.

I want to make it clear that there were times when I freely consented to sex when I would rather not have done so because it was a compromise I made for the sake of a relationship. If it made the person I was with happy, then it was worth enduring for a few minutes. However, there were other times when I was pressured into sex and felt that if I didn’t give in, then worse things would have happened to me.

It wasn’t until the #metoo movement a few years ago that I learned that being pressured into sex was sexual coercion and that it was considered sexual assault.

The reason I didn’t feel as if I had any agency in romantic relationships is primarily due to the toxic masculinity that is ingrained in our culture. Women are often raised to be agreeable and to appease men at all costs because they are deemed inherently violent. Displeasing them risks their wrath which could potentially result in beatings, rape, or even death. The thought that I was assaulted by many of the men who claimed to love me sickens me to this day and is a prime example of how heternormativity is so damaging to a number of people.

Another factor in why my coming out as ace is so difficult for me is due to racist stereotypes. Black people and POC are fetishized in general. Black people, in particular, are regarded as hypersexual. The generational trauma of our oppressors stripping us of our agency over our bodies and our sexuality is ongoing. Many people would draw a blank over a Black ace like myself because I never fit their idea of a so-called “Jezebel,” a derogative stereotype of a Black woman who exhibited sexual freedom. Others would deem me a prude, that not being sexual was a sin against Black womanhood.

I experience a lot of isolation in coming to terms with my sexual identity because the ace community is predominantly young as well as white. I do belong to an ace Meetup group but frankly, I haven’t connected with anyone in it because I don’t have much in common with them.

As I am 50, I don’t get many of the twentysomething aces points of reference such as Bojack Horseman. Also, as I am Black, it’s alienating to be surrounded by people who don’t share your cultural background. The community does not often consider how other intersections interact with asexuality.

Coming out is a frequent topic of debate in the LGBTQIA community and the ace community is no exception. Some argue that aces should come out as it would increase our visibility. The societal default of heterosexuality and allosexuality (those who regularly experience sexual attraction) and the narrative that they are the only natural expressions of sexuality causes harm to those who aren’t either. They feel forced to conform in ways that are contrary to their nature. A prime example of this is that I felt compelled to engage in sex when I didn’t want to because it would prove that I wasn’t broken and that I was normal.

However, just as not having to declare yourself to be heterosexual or allosexual is a privilege as they are regarded as the default, for Black people and POC in particular, coming out as someone in the LGBTQIA community is often a luxury reserved for white people. Although white people in this community share in our queer oppression, they are still beneficiaries of white supremacy — and are not above wielding that power in our spaces.

Black people and POC are often erased or demonized not only in the LGBTQIA community but in our racial and ethnic communities as well. We can feel forced to choose between our race or our sexuality. Speaking only for myself, I can’t and won’t separate my race from my gender or sexuality. Not being allowed to the latitude to be fully human is what triggered the anxiety and depression that I’ve lived with for most of my life. The fact that I am risking my safety to even make this piece public is a testament to how deeply I am oppressed in this aspect of my life.

To give a brief example of just how invisible the ace community is and how ignorant people are about asexuality, months ago, I went to a happy hour with the ace Meetup I mentioned previously. It was held in a known lesbian bar. At one point, I broke away from the group and started to chat with a woman who wasn’t part of the group. She asked what the group was that I had been a part of. When I mentioned that we were an asexual Meetup and that I was ace, she asked, “Does that really exist?” implying that asexuality couldn’t possibly be a real thing.

It was extremely disheartening to be invalidated. But this is par for the course for the ace community. And it’s not just straight people who do this. The woman who invalidated me was a lesbian.

Most people are taught that sex is an inherent part of being human, even the staunchest homophobe or transphobe. Most can’t fathom not experiencing sexual attraction at all. As such, the ace community is regarded as outcasts among both heterosexuals and the LGBTQ+ community, which exacerbates the alienation and isolation I feel.

Another topic that gets debated frequently in the ace community is whether or not to identify as queer. It’s a slur that’s been reclaimed by the LGBTQIA community. The simplest definition of queer is anyone who does not identify as straight or allo (short for allosexual) or cisgender (which denotes someone whose sense of personal identity and gender corresponds with their birth sex).

According to the definition, a lot of aces feel that we qualify to be identified as queer but I’ve been hesitant to do so. The main reason why I’m hesitant is that I’m heteroromantic, which means that I’m romantically attracted to people of the opposite sex or gender. Since I can pass as straight and allo, I have privileges that others in the LGBTQIA community don’t have. I don’t wish to take up needed space from others more marginalized than me in this community.

While I can commiserate with friends over other aspects of my life, asexuality isn’t one of them as it’s so intimate. I already perform emotional labor regularly over the intersections that I have that are visible. I don’t have it in me to perform emotional labor over a part of myself that is so personal and that I’m honestly still learning about.

At times I feel like a freak and a loser for dealing with my sexual identity so late in my life. I envy today’s youth for having the language in understanding themselves that wasn’t afforded to me. I believe that I would have avoided a lot of the pain and trauma that I experienced in romantic relationships if this language had been developed earlier in my life.

The only thing I can do now is to move forward. The continued lockdown in my state has forced me to think about how I want my future intimate relationships to be like. I know that I don’t want to go back to the way things were. Forcing myself to be something that I wasn’t caused tremendous pain and trauma that I don’t want to recreate.

While I don’t want to completely shut down the possibility of finding a partner, I’m a realist. The likelihood that I will find someone who is willing to go without sex regularly is nil. So I’m making peace with the fact that I may be alone for the rest of my life.

The prospect of remaining single doesn’t depress or scare me. In many ways, it excites me. I’ve always been fairly independent and at times, I found intimate relationships stifling. Not having to be accountable to someone else or make compromises is freeing to me. Not once during this lockdown have I yearned for a partner. The increase in domestic violence and sexual assault during the pandemic is enough to make me grateful for my singlehood.

The alienation and isolation I feel over this part of myself are things I’ll have to navigate alone as the larger LGBTQIA community is racist and gatekeeps aces and I don’t fit in the ace community. I exist in a society that was never designed for someone who looks like me, so figuring things out by myself is nothing new to me.

I don’t know where this journey is going to take me next. I don’t expect widespread acceptance of my orientation in my lifetime, let alone acceptance of me period, as I still have several other intersections that I have to navigate daily. All I can do is continue to live my truth. I hope that in time I can do so with love, not fear.

For those who want more information about asexuality, you can go to the following resources:

AVEN-The Asexuality Visibility and Education Network

Asexual People of Color on Their Experiences

AZE

GLAAD