Within a few hundred meters, however, the new airport road came to an abrupt end, and our car had to detour across a dirt patch and onto the old road into town. With Luang Prabang closed to the outside world until the 1990s, the short drive from the airport covered the decades (if not centuries) back to an era of romantic travel rarely found in this modern age.

Farms and houses dotted the wayside, along with fields of rice and vegetables. Palm trees swayed in the breeze. Water buffalo stood content in the sun, happily munching at the lush vegetation, totally oblivious to the naked children on their back vainly kicking the beasts to make them move.

Early morning traffic © A. Harrsion

In 1353 Fa Ngum, an exiled Lao prince, returned from the Khmer capitol of Angkor to establish his kingdom at Luang Prabang — Lan Xang Hom Khao, The Kingdom of a Million Elephants and the White Parasol. (I love that touch of the one white parasol.) Today, Luang Prabang is a place of cobbled streets and quiet cafes overlooking the Mekong. It oozes French colonial charm — if somewhat faded — providing a counterpoint to the old wooden buildings and the innumerable wats, or temples.

Despite a period under Communist rule, Luang Prabang is full of temples, and remains the religious and cultural capital of Laos. Many come to study at the university, and in the popular soap operas, the doctor or intellectual always speaks with a Luang Prabang accent.

Monks seeking alms at dawn © A. Harrison

An Endless Sea of Saffron

As the first light of dawn fell on the day, the faint sound of drums filled the air. They came from every wat, signalling the start of Tak Bat, or the giving of alms. Despite the early rain, the monks walked through the town in a vibrant line of orange and saffron, silently collecting offerings of sticky rice. Every dawn they walk a set route from their various wats, (and with each wat having its own route, an endless procession of monks weaves silently through the streets).

Locals wait silently on the side of the road, giving offerings of sticky rice to the monks as they pass. Many have been up from before dawn, cooking their offering over an outdoor fire of coals. By giving rice (or ‘making merit’), Buddhists believe they will not go hungry in their next life.