Photo by Dorothy May

I have three children and have been socially… distancing? isolating? holing up? with them since March 12 2020. As I write, it’s May 3. I missed April. It went somewhere but I missed it. Anyway, it’s day 52 for two parents with nowhere to go — and three kids with nowhere to be.

It has not been the most beautiful moment of my life, but I’ll be honest, it hasn’t been the worst, either. Not to discount the horrific realities going on just minutes from my doorstep: nursing homes are overburdened and my frontline friends are scared; New York, just hours away, is living through a nightmare. So, I’ll lead this out by saying that I realize that in comparison to the worst case scenario, I’m living a dream.

It’s just that this dream is very noisy and filled with questions including, but not limited to, “where is the food mom right now always?”. And my brain is on fire.

So, I’ve conducted some experiments for finding quiet amongst the noise and I’m going to share my findings with you here.

What I can tell you is that after 52 days alone with three children and a spouse who I love dearly is that there are moments for quiet and I’m going to teach you how to find them. So buckle up sister, because your life is about to get a little more peaceful.

Relax, I said a little.

Pretend You’re Listening to Something

So what you’re going for is silence, right? Listening to a podcast or music isn’t going to add to the silence; it’s just more noise, more voices. The same goes for the screen. The words, the news, the opinions, they’re added noise in one way or another. Sure, they might be beautiful, smart voices adding to important global conversations but they sure aren’t quiet voices and they’re not silence.

Here’s what you do: find a pair of headphones, anything you can snag near you. Put them on your head. You don’t need to plug them into anything and in fact, it’s better if you don’t: you won’t be tempted to turn anything on, that way. What you’re going to do is play a little game of pretend.