Hint: It’s not Mexican Independence Day

Photo by Jorge Aguilar on Unsplash

A lot of folks in the U.S. think of Cinco de Mayo as merely an excuse to wear an oversized sombrero, drink cold Mexican lagers, and slam tequila shots. Contrary to popular belief, the 5th of May is not Mexican Independence Day, which we celebrate on September 16th.

In actuality, Cinco de Mayo celebrates a historic battle that serves as a powerful symbol of the resilience of the Mexican people.

Mexico in the Mid-1800s

In 1861, when Oaxaca’s beloved Benito Juárez became President of the Mexican Republic, he inherited a country in financial ruin. Territorial conflicts with the United States, combined with the internal Reform War between liberals and conservatives, took a heavy toll on Mexico’s resources.

The country found itself deeply in debt to England, Spain, and France. In October of 1861, the three European nations outlined their plans to collect the money owed to them. The agreement, called the Convention of London, included provisions that neither country would make territorial claims in Mexico nor would they interfere with the internal politics of the young Mexican Republic.

In December of that year, the three countries sent naval troops to the port of Veracruz, where the Spanish captured the fortress of San Juan de Ulúa. Shortly thereafter, the European forces took over the nearby cities of Cordoba and Orizaba.

Fortunately for the fledgling republic, Mexican officials managed to negotiate successfully with Spain and Great Britain, who withdrew their forces. The ambitious Emperor Napoleon III of France, on the other hand, saw Mexico’s weakened position and newly elected President as a chance to expand the interests of the French Empire.

The Franco-Mexican War

Also known as the Second French Intervention or the Maximilian Affair, the Franco-Mexican War began when Napoleon III started gathering forces in Mexico under the guise of exploratory expeditions.

Unbeknownst to his European allies, the French Emperor marched thousands of troops toward Mexico City. Mexico’s General Ignacio Zaragoza, unprepared for the siege, promptly lost to the French and fled to Puebla.

Battle of Puebla

While General Zaragoza fought off French troops, President Benito Juárez escaped to the mountains north of the capital, where he gathered an army of a few thousand indigenous peasants and loyal mestizos.

Barefoot and armed mainly with machetes and axes, the President’s makeshift army joined General Zaragoza’s troops against the French invaders in Puebla. On May 5, 1862, the underdog Mexican forces defeated the French in a surprising victory.

A country officially only fifty years old had defeated the forces of a major European empire. To Mexicans and Mexican-Americans, the historic triumph at Puebla represents the tenacious spirit of the Mexican people.

Unfortunately, Mexico won the battle but lost the war. Napoleon III, humiliated by the defeat in Puebla, sent 30,000 troops to fight the Mexican army and claim the country for France. In 1864, the French Empire installed Archduke Ferdinand Maximilian of Austria as Emperor of Mexico.

It wasn’t until 1867, under pressure from the United States, that France abandoned its imperial aims in Mexico. When the French finally withdrew, President Benito Juárez declared May 5th a national holiday.

Celebrating Cinco de Mayo in the United States

In the 19th century, Mexican-Americans started celebrating Cinco de Mayo, hoping to maintain a connection to their home country and Mexican heritage. After the 1848 Guadalupe-Hidalgo Treaty, native Mexicans born in the redistributed territories now found themselves citizens of the United States. Many thousands of Mexicans, including General Zaragoza, who had been born in Texas, suffered a profound identity crisis.

In the 1960s, the celebration of Cinco de Mayo experienced a resurgence in popularity when Mexican-Americans fought for their much-deserved civil rights. Since then, the holiday has become a powerful symbol of Chicano pride.

While we’re all social distancing this Cinco de Mayo, let’s raise a glass of cerveza fría in honor of Benito Juárez, General Zaragoza, and the army of brave civilians who fought the Battle of Puebla. May their indomitable spirits forever dwell in the hearts of all Mexicans and Mexican Americans.

(And por Dios, just sip your tequila like we do in Mexico. Your liver will thank you.)