The Gothic Church That Moved On Wheels

the 11th-century city that got bulldozed in the name of progress

Most around 1920 — Photo archive of the Regional Museum in Most

On March 26, 1964, the Czechoslovak government signed the death warrant of the entire city of Most. No one died as a consequence of this, though: it was the city itself — with its houses, shops, streets, theatres, monuments, parks and schools—that ended up being wiped out.

In the early 1960s a rich supply of lignite (a type of hard coal) was discovered in north-west Czechoslovakia, and the local authorities were very eager to launch mining operations there. There was just a minor disturbance — barely an inconvenience, really: the coal deposit was located right under the center of a town.

The solution the government came up with was a very straightforward one: the entire city was to be razed to the ground and, to house the people who would become homeless as a result of it, a new one would be created elsewhere.

The destruction of the old town began in 1965, and it took almost twenty years to be completed: today it would be seen as a crime against humanity.

A cemetery built in 1853 was torn down in the late 1960s. The town brewery, founded in 1470, was bulldozed in 1972. The town theatre, designed by Alexander Graf and dating back to the 1910s, was demolished in 1981.

Centuries-old monuments were flattened, and the medieval city center was obliterated. Some 55,000 people were moved into low-cost, standardized apartment blocks built specifically for that purpose a few miles away.

The demolition of the old town

Out with the old, in with the new

The people of Most did not speak out against the demolition of the old town and their forced relocation: on the contrary, the majority of them were looking forward to it. The media poured gasoline on the fire, painting Most as a crumbling, dilapidated old place, unsuitable for modern people to live in.

The drab prefabricated concrete buildings of the new town — that look cheap and dreary to the modern eye — were seen as state-of-the-art and comfortable in the 1960s. The grey high-rises had hot water and central heating, modern kitchens and bathrooms, and that was a welcome change from the damp, drafty old houses the people of old Most used to live in. And old it definitely was: some buildings dated back to the middle ages, some were architectural wonders from the 19th century.

The Art Nouveau theatre — Photo archive of the Regional Museum in Most

Even the Communist government, though — notoriously not a fan of religion and its symbols— recognized that the 16th century Church of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary was worthy of being preserved. The people of Most revolted against the demolition of the one-of-a-kind church, and the late Gothic building was simply too historically and artistically noteworthy to be bulldozed down along with the rest of the city. The government had to back down and start to think about a solution: they needed to find a way to save the structure and still be able to expand the coal mine.

After considering and rejecting other alternatives, like leaving it where it was on a coal pillar, or disassembling it and putting it back together in another place (it has been done with temples and even entire monasteries), it was decided to move it: a new location just over a half a mile away was selected, and the whole church was scheduled to be transported there — on wheels.

Moving the church — ČTK Archive

A committee was set up by the Ministry of Culture to supervise the project. Emmanuel Gendel, a well-known Soviet construction engineer who later became the USSR’s leading specialist in moving buildings (yes, that’s a thing) steered the works.

It took nearly seven years to prepare for this unprecedented feat: the church circonference, the bearing and supporting pillars were reinforced and the church was enclosed in a massive steel cage. All the buildings that stood in the way were demolished to clear the path, and rails were installed along the way. The 60-meter-long, 31-meter-wide, and 30-meter-high church was placed on 53 trucks and on September 30, 1975, it was time for the big move.

Archive footage of the relocation— NPÚ archive

The transport trucks worked using computer controlled hydraulics, as were four boom units used to pull the church. As the church moved forward on the road section, rails which had already been passed over were moved from behind the building to in front of it, allowing them to be used again.

In October 27, 1975, the church reached its new home, 841 meters away from its previous location; the story of this incredible move earned this building a place in the Guinness Book of World Records. After the move was completed, restoration work went on for thirteen years.

The impressive accomplishment inspired others to do the same. When Bucharest faced a radical redesign in the 1980s, engineers moved whole buildings hundreds of metres on metal tracks to preserve the Romanian capital’s architectural heritage.