I thought I was prepared to go it alone, but not for months and months.

Photo by Callie Morgan on Unsplash

I’m self-sufficient as the day is long. I can gut a fish and change the oil in my car. The burner on my gas stove wasn’t firing and didn’t want to call a repair guy to break my quarantine, so I figured out to unclog the jets by myself.

And I know how to fire up my old workhorse of a vibrator. I’m rocking this shelter-in-place with my waistline and my mental health intact. At least so far.

So what do I need a man for, I’ve asked myself?

No much, I answer.

But that’s on a day when some guy has acted like a bozo. You know, he hasn’t read my mind and nibbled on that spot without my asking, the one by my ear that turns me on like a rocket.

Or he comes back from the grocery store with everything on the shelves but the can of whipped cream, the only thing on my list. Back in the days when supermarkets overflowed with every culinary indulgence your heart desired. Back when scheduling a run to the supermarket for some foodie kink supplies didn’t make scheduling a G-20 summit look like a walk in the park.

Back when you could take a walk in the park.

Also, back when a quick trip to prep for a night of delicious love didn’t require applying whipped cream to your lover’s privates by remote control and imagining what that super sundae would taste like as you tantalize each other in your separate quarantines on your devices.

But you get the idea. Women can get all persnickety about the men in their lives, insinuating guys don’t have two neurons to rub together, just like men do about women when they think nobody’s listening.

It’s what we do, we humans. Carp about other people when we’re having a bad day. And who better to get all self-righteous about than the people we love most, who are closest to us, who we are liable to take for granted.

And then comes the day when they aren’t around anymore, or they are but we have to worship them from a distance. A social distance, to be exact. And for many of us, or for me in particular, that means only on social media, platforms that let me see a beloved’s face, hear his voice, but that’s about it for now.

And in these look but don’t touch times, I’ve had to reconsider some of the men who have filtered through my life. Some dudes I brushed off a bit too quickly, perhaps, and now wish I could have them at my beck and call.

Oh, yeah. I have a list, all right. And it isn’t for my next delivery of essentials from the delivery service that can give me a slot for a week from Tuesday for some milk, eggs, and toilet paper.

No, here are my five guys I’d pick in a heartbeat to see me through this pandemic. Like many people I know, I was caught off guard by the notice to shelter-in-place. I didn’t have any warning to stock up on pasta sauce, peanut butter, and my favorite cheese. Or a sweet man to keep me company and take care of those pesky chores a resourceful gal could probably handle on her own, but why should she if she had one of these five keepers on hand.

Hank the handyman.

You know the guy I mean, girlfriend. Am I right? He’s not only good with his hands, but he’s got all the equipment to take care of all those fix-it chores that need attention when you’re all alone in your quarantine. He knows the right switches to turn on, the right plugs for your sockets. He’s got the perfect tool for every job, and he’s always on call to take care of your every need.

Oh, yeah. Where was Hank when my bathroom sink got stopped up? It was full of fuzz from doing my own laundry when I decided against making trips to the communal washer and dryer in the basement of my building.

My little sink wasn’t built for industrial-sized jobs like jeans and sheets. When I tried to unstop the sink, the little doohicky over the drain came off in my hands.

So I figured the risk of calling Hank to go to work on my plumbing was worth the inconvenience of disinfecting the place after he left. But I got a message that Hank had asthma and was in quarantine himself. His grandkids were doing his grocery shopping, but if I’d leave my name and phone number, he’d call me when the pandemic was over and take care of my handyman needs. The message, #Stayhomesavelives, rang in my ears as I went diving under my kitchen sink to find my plunger. I had a better slogan. #Ifyouwantsomethingdonedoityourself.

Derek the delivery man.

Show me a woman who doesn’t want a man who delivers. When she needs something important, he’s got the goods, and he knows where to put them. The top shelf, or through the back porch, if you get my drift. He’ll even put his stuff In your drawers — you name it.

And Derek was my man, day or night, whether I needed a special delivery or the usual, as we’d joke when I put in my order, he never disappointed.

Whatever I needed, Derek was my man. You need a quickie? he’d ask.

Most times, I wasn’t in a rush. Take your time, Derek, I’d say. Take as long as you want. Please, no rush. You gotta appreciate a man with a slow hand, who knows had to handle those fragile items.

Over time, I’d learned to trust Derek with all my needs. He got so good at understanding my desires, he knew what I wanted almost before I did. I began calling him the great anticipator. Yeah, he was that good.

So, when Instacart put me on hold for like forever and a day, I thought. Derek. My delivery guy. So I gave him a call and said, Derek. I need stuff delivered. I’m low on everything. Eggs, bacon, that yummy triple creme cheese you used to get at the little shop on the other side of town.

“No can do, Missy. That shop had that little cafe in the back and didn’t have room to social distance so it went belly up. Then “I hurt my back,” and getting more on disability and UI (deliver in a pandemic? You nuts?). So the wife and me are making masks and selling them on Etsy with your astrological sign for a smile. I’ll give you a discount. Selling like hotcakes. Think Etsy is my new gig. Stay safe.”

Well, there goes my special delivery man.

Larry the levitator.

Bogie and Ingrid always had Paris. I always had Larry. He’d take me to new heights, on a moment’s notice. When I couldn’t scale the mountain (so to speak) on my own, Larry would help me levitate. I swear that’s what it was like to see him in action.

Up, up, up we’d go, the little guy in the movie had nothing on us. The air was so rarified, I’d almost get nosebleeds when I’d try that stunt on my own.

So when I needed some levitation, when I really needed to hit the high notes, I caved, said screw the quarantine, I need to light up my life.

Larry, I said. I need you.

But it was lights out. His voice mail wasn’t answering. His FaceBook page was shut down, and his website had a 404 page suggesting other sites for my electrical needs.

So if I wanted to keep the lights on, I’d better get out my rickety ladder and fingers crossed it wouldn’t collapse before I reached the top rung. How hard can it be to unscrew that ancient light fixture and change a few bulbs?

Not as easy as watching Larry climb up on his light, aluminum ladder and use his safety tool that screws in the bulb for him. But hey. How many single moms does it take to screw in a light bulb? Not enough.

Matt the medicine man.

Haven’t you ever wanted to play doctor? Well, lucky me, I always had Matt. He’d check me out and put his little thingy inside me. Well, it wasn’t so little. If you know what I mean.

And he’d feel all those places to make sure everything was working just fine.

I’d say, “Doctor…” He liked it when I called him Doctor. I could tell the way his eyes lit up. He approached his “work” with such dedication. It gave me such a warm, tingly feeling.

So, of course, when something started happening “down there,” in my girly parts, Matt was the first guy I called. I knew I could count on him to give me the “relief” I needed. He always did when we played “Doctor” together. I’d spread my legs and let him “get to work.”

But when I called him and said I needed an “appointment,” his answering service said the government wouldn’t let him take office appointments until the state lifted the Shelter-in-place. I could either call 911 or go to the Emergency Room or try an OTC remedy.

The receptionist (working from home-I heard her kids in the background) asked if I’d like to have the advice nurse call me. She was doing telemedicine. It seems the doctors are idle now, and my health care plan isn’t paying for me to see Matt for a garden variety yeast infection.

So it’s goodbye to Matt and his warm speculums and yearly Ob-Gyn check-ups. They could put me on the schedule to see Dr. Marjorie Edmonds for my next women’s health preventative check-up after the SIP is lifted. I can have every confidence in Dr. Edmonds. She’s been practicing for 40 years and has done groundbreaking research in STDs.

Peter the pussy man.

You have a pussy man, don’t you? I did, until I told him to hit the road. And oh do I rue that day.

What a fussbudget I can be. I didn’t like the way he stroked my pussy. I told him he needed a light hand. Pussy didn’t like it when you touched that certain spot with too much force. And you had to make sure the hair all went in the same direction.

He was hurting my pussy, and I said, that’s enough.

But that was then and this is now. It’s been too long since I’ve had a pussy man, and I’m willing to give him a second chance.

That’s what weeks upon weeks of dealing with your pussy on your own will get you.

Too much navel-gazing, or more to the point, pussy-gazing.

But after the phone call, he said he’d handle everything on Zoom. I had my doubts.

The call came in, and there he was, in all his pussy man glory, grinning at me, ready to get down to business.

Give me a minute, I said. Pussy’s hiding behind the bookcase. I think she recognizes your voice. She remembers that time you touched that spot on her back.

And then Pussy started screaming.

“No, Pussy,” I said. “Calm down. He’s not going to touch you. We’re just going to chat about the owie on your paw. He’s on Zoom. He can’t touch you. Let’s just show him your paw.”

Finally, I gave up. A cat has nine lives, and all of them remember an insensitive vet.

“Next time,” I said to the pussy man and exited out of the Zoom call.

“Pussy,” I said as she crawled onto my lap and started to purr and beg for treats. “If he charges me for that call, you’re not getting any catnip until the next pandemic.”

Call me heartless, but we all have to make sacrifices.

Who says you can’t train a cat?

Hey, anyone know if cat bites serious? Pussy lunged when I mentioned that thing about catnip. Now I need a hand man in my zip code.