Only one of these lifeforms — us — went on to rely heavily on tools, using them to advance their civilization and ensure their survival. Biologists consider this use of tools to be a considerable step in the formation of intelligent life. Our intelligence comes from our expensive and delicate brains. They require a lot of energy and protection, drawbacks which means brains might not be worth recreating in nature. The brain consumes more energy than any other organ and accounts for about 20% of our body’s overall energy use. A fifth of our body’s energy gone to an organ that takes up less than 2% of our weight. For these reasons extraterrestrial life may not see fit to develop “intelligence” in the way that we define it.

This is where we are now. Multicellular organisms heavily reliant on tools and with brains dedicated to processing information.

For our future to remain hopeful, the great filter must lie at some point behind us — in abiogenesis, in RNA, in brains. The fact that so many worlds appear to be sterile is a good sign that life’s beginning is the filter we’ve been looking for. Except, of course, in scientific debates over cases like ALH84001 where a Martian meteorite is believed to have evidence of simple organisms. And we haven’t yet dived into the Solar System’s most promising moons that have the right chemical composition for life.

Though highly debated, it’s been proposed that there is evidence of life colonies in this chunk of Martian rock. Images by NASA.

The only step for us to take now is to expand into our nearby planets and, eventually, nearby star systems. This is the colonization explosion.

But why have no other lifeforms been able to colonize worlds around us? Other civilizations will have wanted to expand; life’s nature is to fill every environment available. As the civilization grows then so will its need for energy and resources. We should see alien colonies harvesting light from stars or taking apart asteroids. Yet there is nothing there. Even if some civilizations would not be driven to colonize the galaxy, most civilizations — like humans — would want to explore in order to research, gather materials to become stronger and outlive their competitors, or simply to avoid a natural disaster occurring back home. Humans will not be able to stay on Earth forever. No alien colony wishing to survive could remain rooted to one place for billions and billions of years.

If our great filter lies ahead then it is an evil which could have any number of faces. Our technology is changing the planet: climate change is devastating ecosystems and dwindling our future food supply. We threaten one another with bombs which could create cold, dead zones in huge parts of the world. Artificial intelligence could someday surpass us in intelligence, genetic engineering and global travel could lead to deadly pandemics, particle physics experiments come always with the possibility that they could get out of hand (such as with the case of strange matter). And if we do survive all these technological scenarios, there still remains the question of interstellar flight — is it even possible to build such grand ships and then terraform or raise sturdy cities on other planets?

There are many, many challenges up ahead. Technology could mean that every civilization inevitably makes its planet inhospitable, or destroys itself in some other way as it advances its nuclear weaponry and artificial intelligence.