Thanks to the recent progress in asteroseismology, the group of researchers led by Laurent Gizon was able to determine the form of KIC 11145123 with extraordinary precision, immensely greater than that which could have been achieved with direct observation. Stars, in fact, are all so far away that their shape cannot be resolved even using the most powerful telescopes (with the notable exception of Betelgeuse, of which Hubble was able to obtain a direct image of the disk).

To observe the shape of a star, astronomers use a particular technique called interferometry, which can be employed, however, only for the nearest stars. Thanks to interferometry, it was discovered, for example, that Altair and Vega, two A-type stars such as KIC 11145123, are oblate (i.e., their polar diameter is smaller than the equatorial one, due to the centrifugal force generated by their fast rotation).

But KIC 11145123 is so far away that it would be impossible to observe its disk even with interferometry. Asteroseismology, on the other hand, proved so powerful that researchers could obtain a perfect knowledge of the star shape, even in the impossibility of direct observation. In fact, the harmonic pulsations of KIC 11145123 are linked by mathematical relationships that allow researchers to distinguish the stellar latitude to which they are associated. Knowing the period of the oscillations, their latitude, and the stellar radius, it is possible to accurately derive the ratio between the equatorial radius and the polar one.

From the calculations, it turned out that this ratio, in the case of KIC 11145123, is so balanced that the difference between the equatorial radius and the polar radius is equal to (1.8 ± 0.6) × 10⁻⁶, i.e., 1.8 parts out of 1 million. Based on the estimated stellar radius, which is 1.56 million km, this difference corresponds to just 2.7 ± 0.9 km. In short, KIC 11145123 is almost perfectly spherical, at a level much higher than the Sun, which was the previous most spherical physical object known. Indeed, the difference between Sun’s polar and equatorial radius is 10 km, i.e., more than three times larger than that between the two radii of KIC 11145123. The Sun is also 2.24 times smaller than this star, which makes the difference between its two radii proportionally bigger.

Of course, the choice of KIC 11145123 for this study of asteroseismology was not random. The rotation period of 100 days indicated a minimal centrifugal force and, therefore, the possibility of finding a correspondingly low polar flattening. However, its sphericity was even higher than it should be expected based on its rotational velocity. The study’s authors hypothesize that the cause of such almost perfect sphericity lies in the possible presence of a weak equatorial magnetic field, which affects the speed with which stellar pulsations propagate, slightly altering the estimate of the ratio between the star’s polar and equatorial radius.

In any case, it is an amazing scientific result to have been able to calculate a difference of less than 3 km in the size of an object distant something like 37 million billion km from Earth. No less surprising, finally, is the almost perfect sphericity of KIC 11145123. Indeed, nature usually produces objects that only approximate the ideal shapes of geometry, but not reproduce them exactly.