The Poet’s Cat

An inexhaustible topic, as it turns out, and full of surprises

Perdita with a favorite book, tweeted by her human, Michael Robbins

The poet in the title of this story is Michael Robbins — writer, teacher, literary critic, and the human companion of a cat named Perdita. I originally set out to talk about his fondly acerbic profile of Perdita for Poetry Magazine in 2012, along with his eccentric, insightful poetry, and Perdita’s Twitter appearances.

But in the process of finding out more about Robbins, I discovered some fascinating lore about poets and cats. Some sources worth sharing:

First: The New Yorker Big Book of Cats — weighing in at more than 300 pages — is a generous collection of cat journalism, cat fiction, cat poems, cat cartoons, and some of the cat covers that have appeared in the magazine over the decades. It features a wonderfully entertaining introduction by Anthony Lane, which is available to read online.

In his review of The Big Book, Robbins includes this striking quote from novelist V. S. Naipaul, grieving for his cat Augustus: “He was the sum of my experiences. He had taken on my outlook, my way of living.” And this account from Boswell’s biography of Samuel Johnson: “I never shall forget the indulgence with which he treated Hodge, his cat; for whom he himself used to go out and buy oysters, lest the servants, having that trouble, should take a dislike to the poor creature.”

Second: The Poetry Foundation offers a collection of cat poems that includes some unexpected items. One is a poem by Cesare Pavese — a serious, even melancholy Italian writer who is not well known in America, but enormously admired in his home country. Eighty years after his death, tourists still flock to the Fondazione Pavese museum, and tour the sites described in his work.

“The Cats Will Know” conveys a deep romantic longing that runs through much of Pavese’s writing. Visit Sideways Station if you’d like to read the original Italian text, along with a fresh translation. And you can even hear both versions read aloud.

Among other poems in the Poetry Foundation’s cat collection: “February” by Margaret Atwood; “The cat’s song” by Marge Piercy”; “Cat and Mouse” by Ted Hughes; and “A Little Language” by Robert Duncan. Duncan writes — “My cat is fluent. He converses when he wants with me.”

Third: There’s Francesco Marciuliano’s I Could Pee on This, and Other Poems by Cats — a delightful book that not only spent months on national bestseller lists, but also inspired a line of notecards and other novelties from its publisher, Chronicle Books. Marciuliano captures perfectly the variety of attitudes and idiosyncrasies that cat lovers find endearing, perplexing, and sometimes annoying in their feline companions. (The poems really are hilarious — and you can “Look Inside” on Amazon to get their flavor.)

Although I Could Pee on This is illustrated with colorful photographs, the author is not only a gifted humorist but also a noted cartoonist. And I am so happy to tell you that National Public Radio once celebrated cats and poetry by asking Marciuliano to create graphical interpretations of poems by Baudelaire, T. S. Eliot, Elizabeth Bishop, Edward Lear, Stevie Smith, Christina Rosetti, and Margaret Atwood. Each drawing is in a different style, capturing the essence of the poem with a few selected lines — and of course, the perfect cat. Go enjoy them as soon as you’ve finished this story!

Although there’s much more to be told, we should return for now to Michael Robbins and Perdita. I didn’t find out whether she is named after the character in A Winter’s Tale (one of Shakespeare’s late romances) or whether she was a found cat (“perdita” means “lost” in Italian).

Or perhaps, as someone suggested online, it’s a pun on “purred.” But however she got her name, Perdita seems to be everything a poet could want in a cat:

She runs to greet me when I come home, and she flops at my feet in the morning to be petted. She loves boxes and balled-up pages of the Nation. She lies on her back in squares of sunshine with her paws in the air and looks perfectly ridiculous and content.

For his part in their partnership, Robbins has published two collections of poetry (Alien vs. Predator, 2012, and The Second Sex, 2014) along with one book of criticism — Equipment for Living: On Poetry and Pop Music (2017). He also has a Ph.D. in English literature, and teaches creative writing at Montclair State University.

This New York Times review of Alien vs. Predator gives a flavor of Robbins’ poetry, which is original, irreverent, and often funny — as demonstrated by these lines from “That’s Incredible”:

I write about cats. Cats, when you read this,

write about me. Be the change you want to see.

Robbins’ Twitter feed shows off his dry sense of humor, and features many photos of Perdita. But late last year (December, 2019), Robbins tweeted that 16-year-old Perdita had suffered a stroke. She was home from the vet and resting comfortably that day.

“Sometimes they recover fully, sometimes not. I’d like some more time with her,” Robbins wrote then. But nothing since.

Many thanks to Perdita and her human for sending me on this impromptu exploration. I’ve found out that poems about cats can be funny, sad, absurd, profound, simple, complex, or all of those things at once.

Just like cats themselves . . .