Photo by Dean Drobot

All of those memes about day pajamas and our lack of grooming during the COVID crisis are funny because they’re true. We really are living our lives in yoga pants. Seventy percent of women reading this article during the period of social distancing really are wearing their hair in a weird bun. Yes, I read the articles about the importance of acting as if you care and I completely agree. But there’s only so much most of us can do. These days, making an effort consists of wearing a decent shirt and makeup with my yoga pants so the top half of my body will look decent on Zoom.

And it was in this, “I can’t really be bothered to care too much about how I look right now” context that I decided for literally the first time in almost 20 years to forego blowing-out my hair. The last time I tried the no blow-dry experiment, it was an unmitigated hair disaster. I kind of expected the same results this time but figured no one would see it anyway so who really cares.

Surprisingly, it turns out that sometime in the last couple of decades my hair became curly/wavy without me realizing it. All of these years I’ve spent styling it into submission meant I had no idea what would happen if I just let it go. At first, I didn’t love the new look but my teenaged daughter was very complimentary and those of you with teenaged daughters know that doesn’t happen every day. So I went with it. After a few days sans blow-dryer, I started to embrace what I now try to think of as mermaid hair. I’m still on the fence about whether I will continue this when I have to venture outside of my home and see people again. But I do see a metaphor in my hair experience.

I’m 51 years old. I feel like the last decade of my life has been one invitation after another to strip away the things that weren’t authentically me. I started calling myself a life coach even though I was afraid of what my smart and accomplished friends might think. I stopped working in more prestigious and lucrative corporate settings and focused on helping teenagers and anxious kids and anxious parents because that’s what my heart called me to do. I wrote the complete antithesis of an academic book. Little by little, I’ve been throwing away the things I hid behind trying to look smart or professional or accomplished.

And my hair was just the latest but, in some ways, the most profound example. What started as an “I wonder what would happen if…” experiment turned into an exercise in releasing control and just allowing. You might think my professional exploration would be more profound. However, I haven’t been trying to master my professional image since late elementary school. But I sure as heck have been battling my hair for that long. Through disastrous perms, laughable hot roller experiences… I’ve wrangled straightening irons and round brushes. I’ve doled out small fortunes for keratin treatments, and even more for Brazilian blowouts. Oh, and on top of that, there were the various hair colors I’ve sampled over the years. I’m blondish now but my husband refers to the time when we met as my “goth phase”. I think I’ve tried it all. If there is one place in my life I have tried to maintain a white-knuckled level of control, it’s my hair.

And yet… I went so far as to participate in a public webinar wearing my natural hair last week. Of course, as soon as it finished I was overwhelmed with the feeling of “oh no, what have I done?” I immediately texted a friend who has witnessed my evolution from straight waist-length hair to a pixie to the Anniston and on and on. She replied that she saw the live stream and thought my hair made me look younger.

Younger? It was as if the light shined down from heaven and the angels sang. Ok, yes, a global pandemic and economic uncertainty could also be considered huge messages from the universe in and of themselves. But sometimes cosmic messages need to be a bit more personal. And in this case, the no blow-dry message was clear. Relax. Let go. You don’t have to control everything. You can just be yourself. Great things might happen. Someone might actually think you look younger.

*****************************

I’d love to connect with you on Facebook. I’d also love to share a free downloadable copy of my book, Stop Worrying About Your Anxious Child.