How a campground in East Africa is saving lives, one cold beer at a time

Black Mamba — by TimVickers / Public domain

Meserani, Tanzania may only be a half-hour drive from the city of Arusha, but it may as well be another world. As you leave the frenetic regional capital, buzzing with motorcycles and dala dala minibus taxis, the traffic dissolves into coffee plantations, then open plains. Maasai warriors in shuka blankets lean on walking sticks on the side of the road. Their cattle kick up dust, the snowy peak of Kilimanjaro towering behind them.

When the Bale family and Deon Naude bought ten acres of land in Meserani in 1993, the ground was barren and dry. Today towering trees and blooming flowers attract over 60 species of birds to the campground they’ve built. Bejeweled sunbirds flit between flowers. Lovebirds squawk from thorny acacia trees and helmeted guineafowl skitter between backpacking tents. Tourists come here for the birds, the astonishing collection of rescued and educational reptiles in the park’s small zoo, and the lively bar. They hope they don’t have to return for the park’s other offering: the only clinic in northern Tanzania with a ready supply of snake antivenom.

The World Health Organization estimates that a staggering 32,000 people die every year from snakebites in sub-Saharan Africa. Part of the reason this part of the world sees such a disproportionate number of snake-related fatalities is due to the astonishing array of venomous species found here. Mambas, vipers, adders, cobras, and boomslangs abound. Snakes thrive in places humans frequent including agricultural fields, water sources, and in areas where human activity attracts rodents. The snake that is responsible for the highest number of fatalities here is the puff adder. The species’ wide distribution, ability to thrive in highly populated regions, and well-camouflaged body design means it is all too easily stepped on by agricultural workers.

The long list of venomous species in the region doesn’t wholly explain the death toll. After all, Australia is home to its fair share of deadly serpents and sees an average of just two fatalities per year. What makes sub-Saharan Africa such a hotbed for snakebite fatalities is due to the nature of the primary method of treating bites: antivenom.

Antivenom is expensive. A vial can cost between $140 and $300, and it typically takes ten or more to save a person’s life. It needs refrigeration to maintain its effectiveness, a problematic requirement in an area like rural Tanzania where power outages and surges are an everyday occurrence. Antivenom is produced by injecting a host animal, typically a horse or sheep, with a small, non-lethal amount of venom. The blood from the host animal is then extracted, and the antibodies it has produced to fight the venom is collected and purified. It is a costly and labor-intensive process.

In some cases, laboratories can create polyvalent antivenoms, medications capable of treating the bite of multiple snake species. In other instances, the antivenom must be specific to the snake. Africa’s boomslang is one such species. All this means that few medical facilities in Africa are equipped to treat snake bites. When the bite of a black mamba can kill in as little as 30 minutes, proximity to antivenom is a matter of life and death.

Maasai at the Snake Park — photo by Jenna Richards on Flickr

It’s difficult to classify the Meserani Snake Park. As you walk the facilities, you begin to imagine how it grew with each passing year as the Bales and Naude added more buildings and features. It is primarily known as a campground and bar popular with backpackers and overlanders needing a cheap place to pitch their tent, a shower, and a cold beer. Its location just outside of Arusha serves as the perfect jumping-off spot for safaris into the Serengeti or summits of Kilimanjaro. Its namesake zoo acts as an educational and wildlife rehabilitation center. Dozens of snakes, birds of prey, tortoises, and crocodiles call the center home. A pair of friendly ambassador snakes await those curious enough to hold them, introduced by knowledgable and helpful guides. There is the Maasai museum and living history exhibit, complete with camel rides and a women’s craft market. A mechanic’s workshop offers everything from oil changes to tent repairs. The park employs over 50 locals in total as guides, cooks, cleaners, mechanics, medics, and security guards. And then there is the medical clinic.

Recognizing the lack of a treatment center in the area, the Bales and Naude built a small health clinic in a corner of the property. Supported by the proceeds from the park along with small individual donors and sponsors, the clinic provides free medical services for more than 1,000 patients a month. Many of its most critical patients are snakebite victims, like the young Maasai woman I met there who had been saved from the deadly bite of a black mamba with ten vials of antivenom.

A scroll through the website for a recent fundraiser for the Snake Park shows a string of appreciation from the loved ones of those the clinic has saved, including local safari guides and an artist from Colorado. When my husband came down with a life-threatening case of malaria while we were working as tour guides, it was here that he found treatment and recovery.

The Snake Park bar — photo by algreen on Flickr

Most evenings you can find Lynn “Ma” Bale or Deon behind the bar, slinging cold Kilimanjaro beers and mixing drinks from the park’s legendary cocktail list. Most famous are the shooters named after African animals such as The Springbok and Big Bad Buffalo, created from local spirits like Amarula and Konyagi. T-shirts hang from the rafters and photographs line the walls, commemorations of epic adventures through the continent. Ma rules the bar as matriarch with warmth and confidence. Patrons are free to have a good time, so long as they remember their manners. There is absolutely no swearing allowed at the Snake Park. Ma takes particular delight in pouring rowdy customers a round of “Ma’s Revenge,” her custom pub-closing shooter made from tequila, vodka, and Tobasco.

For those of us in the tourism industry, the Snake Park is more than a good bar on the way to the Serengeti. It is home. The Bales insist we consider them our surrogate family in Africa. When our vehicles break down, when we need a spare part for a camp stove, or we just want a good breakfast and a sympathetic ear, the Snake Park is there for us. Ma keeps a book behind the bar titled “If I Ring My Mom, Will She Be Home?” In its pages are handwritten accounts of the funniest questions tourists have asked guides over the years. It provides a bit of much needed comic relief and camaraderie to those who work in the tourism industry, whose jobs can be exhausting and lonely, despite appearing like an endless vacation to outsiders.

Guidebook reviews of the campground mention the bar and the museum but fail to capture the spirit of community the Snake Park has fostered and the lives it has so profoundly impacted. This past week Meserani Snake Park founder BJ Bale passed away after a long battle with cancer. He was laid to rest among the community he built and loved.