These various defense mechanisms are all survival strategies. We have a central, core way we are wired to react but access all types intermittently.

So what can we do when emotional inflammation arises and shows it’s fangs. A powerful beginning is to identify and tag your triggers. I brought mine to the surface and took a good look at their origins.

I’m primarily a Molten Reactor and have to mentally override my initial emotional responses to cope with individual circumstances. I’m hyper aware of the three biggest triggers in my anger zone — any form of racism, sexually inappropriate behavior and environmental degradation.

When I backtracked in my consciousness to uncover the roots of my reactions, it was no mystery why I get triggered. My father was a first generation American raised by two Italian immigrants. He went through the public school system in New York City and suffered corporal punishment for speaking a foreign language at any time on school grounds. He was frequently judged as the son of WOPS [Italian immigrants without papers], an untrue assumption in his case. He also experienced racial prejudice due to his olive complexion and untamed hair.

He was adamant with all eleven of his children, that we should never, ever judge another person by the color of their skin or country of origin. He drilled this lesson into us often, in a variety of ways. I hold gratitude for his indoctrination of justice and equality for all and little tolerance for bigots.

I endured two attempted rapes while I was still a teen. Anyone who has experienced sexual assault can testify to the deep embedding with that trauma and the personal work it takes to integrate the wound. Many of us, including myself, go on to become advocates for the safety and well being of vulnerable populations.

I have had a steady love affair with the natural world all my life. It has been my place of worship and spiritual upliftment. I have immense respect and appreciation for everything our beautiful planet generously provides. When I read about corporate greed and the destructive effects energy vampires wreak on common and preserved land, I have to take an inflammation break.