Photo by Mary Lynne Carpenter

Knock, knock. My front door creaks open as I peer out the porch screen. “You missing a rabbit?” my neighbor inquires.

It’s not every day that someone asks you that question. Granted, I do live in a rural area. But still.

Turns out my neighbor discovered a big, black rabbit hopping around his house. A domestic rabbit it was, quite distinct from the wild cottontails that populate our area. I have a soft spot for critters, but I know next to nothing about rabbits. I immediately became engulfed in the welfare and story of a rabbit I had not even met.

Unfortunately for both the rabbit and my neighbor, none of the doors that he knocked on that morning belonged to the owner of the rabbit. No one claimed to know whence the rabbit came.

Over the next week or so, the rabbit continued to periodically appear on my neighbor’s property as well as my own. Eventually, I was able to get close enough to the rabbit to discover he was quite friendly. The rabbit was curious about me and enjoyed being petted. When I tried to pick him up though, he panicked. I then panicked in response to his panic. So the rabbit remained unsecured.

Photo by Mary Lynne Carpenter

During one of my rabbit encounters, I spotted a tattoo on the inside of his left ear. At first, I thought I saw numbers, but the closer I looked, I recognized letters. S-M-O-K-E. Smoke! The rabbit came with a name.

Armed with that new information and a few photos of Smoke, I blitzed my area with phone calls and emails. I reached out to friends, veterinarian offices, animal shelters, county 4H extension offices, a rabbit breeder’s association, the House Rabbit Society, a county animal control officer, and a local farm & feed store. My quest to finding Smoke’s owner was as unsuccessful as my neighbor’s.

I did reach a couple of kind folks who offered to post the rabbit’s photos on various Facebook pages as I am not a member. I am allergic to Facebook, but I do recognize its power of connection. I emailed the photos and continued to watch for the rabbit.

Meanwhile, Smoke kept himself safe and groomed. He took naps in the shade and munched on the lush spring grass. I put out bowls of water in places I had seen him frequent. But in the process of reading up about rabbits, I learned that domestic rabbits do not typically have a good chance of surviving in the wild. I prayed that one of the contacts I made would result in Smoke finding his way back home.

Fortunately, the same day that the local animal-control officer posted Smoke’s photo to the county Facebook page, the owner contacted me. She quickly and correctly identified the rabbit’s name. I had asked the officer not to reveal the name on the ear tattoo so I could use that piece of information as to ownership verification. That same afternoon, the owner drove to my neighbor’s property. She retrieved Smoke and off they went back home together.

Photo by Mary Lynne Carpenter

Unfortunately, I didn’t learn much more about Smoke other than that “he” was actually a female rabbit. I still wonder about the circumstances of the doe vanishing from home. But in contemplating my experience with Smoke, I drew a few conclusions that might be useful for all of us who at one time or another have lost our way in life.

You may not be as far from home as you think

Smoke’s home sat maybe a quarter of a mile away at most. If she had pivoted and hopped in the right direction, she might have easily found it. Wherever you are in life, spend some time considering your current spot and where you want to go. You may be closer to your goal than you realize.

2. If you can’t immediately find your way back, locate a soft place to catch your breath

I can’t say for sure what Smoke thought, but I wondered if she didn’t know where home was. Was Smoke simply using my neighbor’s property as a rest stop? Maybe she passed through on purpose as part of her grander journey towards home. Not a bad idea, I thought. Sometimes, when knocked off course in life, we may need to pause our journey. We may need to momentarily refuel physically, mentally, or spiritually. It is only then that we garner the strength to continue down our chosen path.

3. While you are lost, be open to learning something new along the way

Did Smoke learn anything? I don’t know about that, but I sure learned a whole lot about rabbits. I did quite a bit of reading about their habits and care. The same day that Smoke happened to go home, a couple of kind souls offered me advice and assistance via email. I tucked away their comments and suggestions for future use. You never know when another rabbit will cross your path.

4. Sometimes you need help from your community to find home

Smoke’s “four degrees of separation” went from my neighbor- to me- to the animal control officer- and back to Smoke’s owner. Each of us had an important part to play in the story. Sometimes when we go down the wrong path, we get stuck in place. To start the ball rolling again, we may need to reach out to a series of other folks for assistance.

While my own story with Smoke ends here, I hope that she stays with her family. I hope she leads a happy life with a bright future. What more could a rabbit, or anybody else for that matter, want? We should all be so fortunate to find home after losing our way.