When You Find Your Heroes Don’t Believe in Global Warming

Ah, the Dissonance when you discover that people are not two-dimensional!

There’s a point in Clive James’ autobiography ‘Falling Towards England’ when he’s just arrived in London from his native Australia and is trying to find his way through dense, thick smog. He asks a woman for directions. She’s alarmed because he located her “mainly by feel” (I think those were the exact words — my copy is in a box on the other side of the Tasman). Somewhere else in the book he spins- out an effort to find a urinal for what must have been a couple of pages, before finally, “sobbing with relief”.

I loved James’ autobiographies, and he had a wonderful turn of phrase. Here’s another one: he described Barbara Cartland’s eyes as so made-up they looked: “like the corpses of two crows that had flown into a chalk cliff.”

He was also a literary critic and essayist as well as a television personality (I hate him for his astute comment that be be successful in that genre, your head had to “fit” the shape of the TV screen — no chance for me). James came to Brisbane around 2000 for a book signing. I went, got a signature, asked him if he was planning another autobiography, got a gruff affirmative. Whatever, I’d communicated with the great man.

James excelled at humour and was an expert literary critique, but he also faulted climate science. A couple of years before his cancer finally caught up with him, he contributed a chapter to the Institute of Public Affairs publication, ‘Climate Change: The Facts 2017’, where he wrote:

“The proponents of man-made climate catastrophe asked us for so many leaps of faith that they were bound to run out of credibility in the end.”

Well, hang-on. I thought he was on ‘my side’? What else is this guy saying?!

James had evidently decided that the entire field of climate science and the problem of global warming, was not only just a mistake, went on to and likened “the apparently imminent disintegration of the alarmist cause to the collapse of a house of cards”. Behind his conclusion were ‘predictions’ that apparently hadn’t happened, and a range of the usual, tired bits of misinformation that simply won’t die. James summed up by saying: “For as long as the climate change fad lasted, it always depended on poppycock”, and died himself, on November 24, 2019.

And then there was David Bellamy, aka, ‘The Botanic Man’. Bellamy was a English botanist who published on his specialty of peat bogs. But he became famous through popularising botany on T.V. (and you have to be damned good to get people enthused about plants). At the height of his fame, he came to New Zealand to film a series about our nature, called ‘Moa’s Ark’. As an authority on one of our special places — the Jurassic fossil forest at Curio Bay, I got to meet him. I guided him and his team around the fossil forest for some filming, and watched while he ad-libbed his lines. The basic plan was that he would be Robin Hood in the English Sherwood Forest, and fires an arrow from a bow.

Cut to New Zealand, where the arrow glances along a fossil log. Bellamy (somehow getting there too) picked up the arrow and puts the sharp end on a big fossil stump, where you can see the ancient growth rings, like grooves on a record player (if you don’t know what they are, go ask your parents. … Grandparents?). Asks “what story can this stump tell us?”, runs around the stump, keeping the arrow on the growth rings, looks puzzled, says “Wrong speed!”, and runs around again, faster. Funny guy, and all the funnier for his speech impediment, where “Brontosaurus” would come out as “Bwontosawus”.

Some days after the filming, he came to visit me in my office. We chatted about ways to fund my speciality — fossil plants. Bellamy suggested that I “flog off” (sell) some of them. When I reacted with horror and said that I would lose my scientific credibility, Bellamy countered with something like “So what? I’ve got none either”.

Well….

David Bellamy later seems to have run afoul of his backers by voicing his doubts about climate science. In one publication, ‘The Global Warming Myth’ he wrote:

“I don’t like being called a denier because deniers don’t believe in facts. There are no facts linking the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide with imminent catastrophic global warming there are only predictions based on complex computer models.”

English journalist George Monbiot took Bellamy to task over some of his published views, which Monbiot regarded as “wildly misleading statements about global warming”. Monbiot’s investigation resulted in a retraction of sorts from Bellamy. But Bellamy’s star seemed to fall and that was basically the end of his career, and he felt it was partly a result of expressing his contrary views on climate change. Bellamy died just 17 days after Clive James (Dec 11, 2019). Sad, we could do with more people having his infectious enthusiasm generating excitement for …. plants.

Another one of my early heroes (the earliest of the lot, by far — I knew him since I was a high school student) was Bob Carter. Carter was an expert geologist, specifically a sedimentologist, who wrote a range of academic papers exhibiting brilliant deep-thinking. And then suddenly he rose to prominence as Australia’s leading ‘skeptic’ of climate change. Some would say ‘Leading climate change denier’ (though I prefer to avoid those unhelpful phrases). I wrote a separate post about Carter, and won’t repeat it here, but basically Carter decided to focus his geological energy and talents into writing a book, ‘Climate: The Counter Consensus’ and actively campaigning against global warming science. His book is full of what are widely regarded as standard-issue ‘denialist’ points, as well as some astonishing claims, like “There is no Theory of Climate”. The book has been roundly canned by several experts.

Carter’s excursion into climate change appears not to have gone well. His position at James Cook University may have been lost in 2013 as a result of his views on climate change. Carter died a few years later, on January 19, 2016. That was unfortunate, there was a lot more serious geology he could have contributed.

So there are three people who I met, ‘heroes’, whose thoughts I admired, but who turned out to have some views , specifically on climate change — that I definitely disagreed with. Researchers have concluded that most people who ‘deny’ science in the face of overwhelming evidence do so because of their deep-down, political motivation, and climate change skeptics tend to be on the right/conservative end of the political spectrum. Their core world-view is driven more by ideology than science. It seems that at some point, if the science and evidence contradicts the ideology, the ideology will over-rule.

I’m not sure how that conclusion relates to these three people. In his Wikipedia entry, Clive James is quoted as saying, “I was brought up on the proletarian left, and I remain there”, and he is said to have identified as a ‘liberal social democrat’. So he was certainly not a right-wing conservative. However, he supported the invasion of Iraq, and that doesn’t sound like your stereotypical leftist. Bellamy, on the other hand, had impeccable ‘Greenie’ credentials, having even been arrested for protesting against a proposed dam in Tasmania. Carter associated with ‘The Heartland Institute’, “an American conservative and libertarian public policy think tank” and with leading conservative newspapers such as ‘The Australian’. Make of that what you will.

But this isn’t about Climate Change. It’s about people being multi-dimensional, and finding out that some of someone’s views are quite different from what you expected, can be absolutely jarring.

I’ll give another example, this time, not about climate change, but more international politics. I’m a big fan of the above-mentioned English journalist George Monbiot, as well as the Australian political commentator Caitlin Johnstone. I’ve followed them both via Twitter, Medium, and on their blogs. Both of them have an admirably low (zero) tolerance for bullshit. I’ve read several of Monbiot’s books, and love his ideas on ‘re-wilding’ and his critiques on capitalism. I like Johnstone’s views on American politics and the Syrian war. Like her, I’m a fan of Australian journalist John Pilger, and Beirut-based Robert Fisk, and based on what I had read from Johnstone-Pilger-Fisk, I had no reason not to believe that Syrian president Bashar al-Assad was a basically a pleasant, maligned ophthalmologist.

But then….. enter Vanessa Beeley and her views on Syria’s ‘White Helmets’. While Johnstone promotes her as a fearless on the ground reporter (See one of Caitlin Johnstone’s Medium posts here and another Medium writer, Brian Whitaker’s post here), Monbiot evidently regards her as a down-right scoundrel, essentially an apologist for a very evil Syrian regime (see a Twitter discourse here).

See where I’m going here? Suddenly I find that two people who I basically revere (Monbiot and Johnstone), have absolutely diametrically different views on someone/something. That’s a real mind-f##k. When I found that out — I felt the Earth sway beneath my feet. Which one should I ‘follow’? Should I follow either of them? Is one of them right and the other wrong? How would I know?

Unlike climate science, where I do have some clues (as a paleontologist I’ve published in the field, and have read the papers on anthropogenic climate change for twenty years), I’ve never been to Syria (weirdly though, the very weekend the conflict started, I was looking into Syria from the edge of Turkey). When it comes to something as complex as politics in a foreign country, or events that happen in war zones, what I ‘believe’ can mostly only be what I hear by listening to my echo-chamber.

I have no answer to that, but of course, what I’m getting at here is not about Syria either. The point is — people are complex. They have far more than one or two dimensions. When you come across someone, or some media outlet babbling about ‘The Left’ or ‘The Right’, as if these are simple, monolithic entities, and then trying to force the views of some individual as being a ‘Lefty’ or a ‘Conservative’— realise it’s bullshit. Realise you’re hearing a rabble-rouser trying to push emotional buttons. Yes, there is a Left to Right political spectrum. But it doesn’t work that way for individuals. Beware of facile black and white thinking. Real life is nuanced.

***

Years later, I still crack up every time I think of Clive James locating that woman “mainly by feel”. But I don’t like or agree with his views on climate change at all. When it comes to the horrendous issue of global warming, what we understand is based on the light from more than a couple of centuries of solid science. We aren’t groping our way in the smog.