Back in mid-February, I was chatting with a friend about a piece of news I read that stated more men than women were dying from the disease caused by the coronavirus. He snorted, “Fewer men in the world. I bet that makes you happy.”



This was a joke — and as I mentioned, these were the olden times of mid-February — so I laughed. Then I came back with my own little jab about how maybe the pandemic was syncing up with the #MeToo movement. My friend cringed, and we laughed, just two self-identifying feminists sharing a chuckle over something that we didn’t realize was about to become a worldwide horror show.

Later that day, something happened that often happens when I make a joke: I regretted it. The interaction played over in my head, and I started to beat myself up over the callousness of what I had said, even though I was just kidding. Then I did another thing I always do. I started to read between the lines.



Fewer men in the world. Bet that makes you happy.

This is a remark someone makes on the defense, not the offense. The subtext here is: guess you man-haters are finally getting what you want. My hunch is my friend said this because in some way, however subconscious, he felt threatened.

And that feeling of being threatened is validated by the truth in the numbers. Most countries are reporting a significant gender bias in terms of casualties from COVID-19. Seems like the jury is still out on why this is the case, but a lot of speculation is being thrown around: some theories are biological (for one example, many of the genes that synchronize the immune system are located on the X chromosome — and women are blessed by two of those, which possibly increases their ability to fight off infectious disease), and some are behavioral (in the U.S., men are more likely to smoke, are less likely to seek medical care, and are more prone to being dum-dums about not taking preventative measures to control the spread of the pathogen).

I was still turning my friend’s comment over in my brain the other day as I listened to a story on a popular podcast of a young male doctor who was the first person to test positive for COVID-19 in New Jersey. He recounted falling critically ill and being hospitalized, and bemoaned the fact that his care team didn’t seem to be taking his very serious symptoms seriously enough. As he described his feelings of helplessness, I choked up.

The story itself was gripping, but my emotional response came from a much more selfish and sensitive place. I know that look on a doctor’s face, the tired frown that suggests he believes his patient is overreacting. I know that pang in my gut, when I’m exhausted and frustrated by not feeling heard or seen. How many women do I know who have pleaded with their physicians to take their pain seriously? How many times have I been that pleading woman?

There is quantifiable pain, the kind that can be read by oxygen saturation monitors, and then there is invisible pain, something that is felt in a body but cannot be translated into data on a screen. Both of these kinds of pain are real, but only one kind can be proven. The other kind has to be believed. What I felt as I listened to this story was an unexpected sense of kinship, the recognition of an analogous lived experience in another. Generally speaking, when it comes to being transparent about infuriating encounters I’ve had with male doctors, I can commiserate with most of my female friends who have similar horror stories. It’s less common for me to find an obvious point of connection about this with a dude.

Before anyone jumps down my throat with his unwashed thumbs, I do not mean to trivialize the severity of this man’s plight — thank goodness he advocated for himself, and luckily survived — or to undermine the important work of doctors and nurses during this terrifying crisis. I have tremendous respect and gratitude for the healthcare professionals who are out there without proper protection, putting themselves at risk to save others’ lives. It is the systems we have built which have failed us, not the workers inside them.

And that is where the shared experience thing comes in. If men are feeling threatened and vulnerable and not listened to, then they are getting a glimpse into the female experience when it comes to medical treatment. Most American women have had their own run-ins with feeling gaslighted in a doctor’s office. Women are more likely to communicate their pain to their healthcare providers, but less likely to be treated for it. This has been called the “gender pain gap.” To me, this evidences just one flaw in our significantly flawed healthcare system — the lack of an ability to connect or relate when lived experiences are different.

And just to be clear: I am not happy about any of this. The deadliness of this virus breaks my heart no matter what the genitals look like on the bodies it targets. I don’t want to propagate the idea that I believe men are getting some kind of cosmic comeuppance for the patriarchal systems of oppression that have plagued (sorry, but that’s just the most appropriate word to use) this country for centuries. I’m scared for the men I love, and the men I don’t know, and the women and non-binary and gender-nonconforming folks I love and those I don’t know. I’m scared for people, full stop.

The joke I made in response to my friend’s joke was also made out of defensiveness. The subtext was: doesn’t feel good that your gender identity makes you predisposed to certain unpleasantries, does it? I swear, I was just trying to lighten the mood.

We don’t know the long-term impact that this pandemic will have on American healthcare. I’m not a doctor or a scientist or a politician — I’m a painter, which one might argue is as far away as you can get from any of those professions — and I have zero authority to confidently prognosticate about what that change could look like. But part of my job as an artist means believing in imagination. So what do I like to imagine? Maybe policy shifts in service of closing, not widening, the gender pain gap. More funding and research and attention paid to female health. New protocols that prioritize access, equity, and connecting over the reciprocal experience of inhabiting a body. Less throwing drugs at symptoms. More time listening. More tenderness.

Oh, and I imagine systems, healthcare and otherwise, rooted in believing women.