Today, I walked past the four-foot mirror with an antique gold frame adorned with swirls and flowers and fruit, hanging in my dining room. I caught a glimpse of a reflection of a lined and folded visage. It gave me a fright.

Who is she? How did she get into my house? I turned around and she disappeared. Frozen in place, I was terrified. The fear drained from my body one drop at a time, and I inched closer to the edges of the mirror frame.

A delicate earring shaped into little hearts that hung from rays of gold tinkled as my eyes fell upon a drooping earlobe with one lone horizontal crease dividing it in half.

Earrings

Wait, aren’t those the earrings my mother gave me before she died? I remember when she placed them in my hand with a warning that I cannot wear earrings that swing and sway after fifty.

“It’s not appropriate for women to wear ones that hang more than two inches from the ear when you’re that old. It makes you look fresh,” she said. I think she meant that in a negative sense.

“Why did you give them to me, now?” I asked.

“It’s for your granddaughters. Let them fight it out after I’m gone,” she said.

“I’m not even sure they will wear them, Mama.”

“Well, the girls can sell the damn earrings and split the money!” she snickered. I’m not sure they are worth all that much.

Okay. I’m getting distracted.

Exposure

A few strands of wispy graying hair shimmering silver, blue, purple, and white like the feathers of a peacock curled down the hairline. The ringlets brushed against the rough, scaly patches of actinic keratoses. You know, the age spots women get from too much sun exposure.

As a daughter of the 60s and 70s, I bathed under the caress of crystal sunlight in Oklahoma and California. This was before we began to experience the ravages of exposure to ultra-violet rays. I remember billboards of the bare- rumped child and her playful dog glorifying a “healthy” tan.

I looked a little closer at lines splayed like the fingers of an open hand extending from the corner of the picture frame. Deep furrows that seemed to hold spaces eager to receive the seeds of smaller lines.

How far down do the roots grow?

Eyes

Almost immediately, an intensely blue eye half-hidden by a puffy hood of spongy flesh came into view. I startled at the clarity of it. They say the eyes are the windows to the soul.

I looked and saw depths of chronic pain, grief, joy, and forgiveness swirling in the ocean underneath. Dolphins glided, playfully dancing through the waves. A blue whale of forgiveness lumbered by carrying tons of sorrow and grief swallowed and sprayed into the atmosphere as she broke into the sunlight. I jumped when a shark struck out, bloody razor teeth bared, going in for the kill.

When I came back to myself, I continued my exploration of the old lady in the mirror.

Skin

Instead of the youthful glow that one made have had in the past, I observed a spotted and sallow complexion. Spotted remains of the freckles of childhood grown into uneven blotches of varying shades of copper and brown. Sallow in terms of loss of luster and voluptuousness of skin bouncing back after a touch.

Finally, lined edges of the mouth sauntered into view. Creases flowing south until they reach the chin. Tears and affliction etched into the skin. Lips — once full, thinning with the passage of days and years.

Slowly, the different components synergize into a whole reflection of the alien intruder in my house. I recognized her — it is me.

That realization itself speaks volumes. One book contains songs I sang. Another is about the skeletons I hang. The thickest tome comprises the battles I won or lost. My face portrays the exorbitant cost.

In this age of youth and beauty, the reality is I lost sight of who I am. As have so many of us. I believe it is time to take a deeper look in the mirror and refamiliarize ourselves with ourselves.

Then, our beauty will shine once again.