Why do Writers Fall for This Self-Publishing Myth?

Is self-publishing a shortcut? Not in the way you might think.

Photo by Jurica Koletić on Unsplash

Recently a woman posted in one of my author Facebook groups wanting advice on a self-publishing partner that was cheating her out of her royalties. She wanted to get her rights back and find a traditional publisher who would publish her memoir, which she was sure would sell well since it contained themes similar to a recent best-selling memoir. Writers commiserated with her and recommended she speak with an arts attorney. Some suggested she move on and write her next book.

When I told her that traditional publishers generally didn’t pick up books that had been self-published, she suggested her book would be the next best seller and that it would be different for her.

I was glad she believed in her story, but she was missing the point.

Having a self-published book picked up by a publisher is rare

This incident was still fresh in my mind when another friend told me that he was thinking of self-publishing a nonfiction book to build a brand and hopefully get picked up by a publisher or an agent. I told him the same thing — self-publishing could generate a publisher’s interested in a future book, but a publisher wouldn’t pay for something that was already published. I thought this was fairly well-understood by aspiring authors, but my friend also felt like this is a viable path to traditional publishing.

How this myth harms writers

I’ve heard a self-published say that she’d heard that if you sold 10,000 copies of your book, a publisher would be interested in it.

But there is no magic number. Getting republished by a traditional publisher happens only occasionally.

Self-publishing is publishing, and a publisher isn’t going to spend their money to acquire a book that is already published–a book that is already reached its target audience.

If you self-published and your book is selling really well, the publisher might worry that any potential audience has already purchased the book. Who would be left to buy it? Why would the publisher assume the risk now that you’ve already sold at? And why would you want to have a traditional publisher put out your book (and take a share of your profit) if that book is doing well?

If your book is not selling well–the reason this author wanted to find a traditional publisher–the face an uphill battle, because you failed to demonstrate proof of concept for the publisher.

No one is going to be a more passionate advocate for your book than you are, and if you can’t generate sales, why would a third-party buy a book that you can’t sell?

Yes, self-publishing can line you up to get a deal with a traditional publisher on a future book. It can help you connect with readers and built a fanbase, so you have a platform that’s attractive to a publisher. Self-publishing can be a great way to earn income from writing, and it offers a way to be in control of the timing of your career.

If you want to self publish, self publish.

But do it with a clear understanding of your goals and the amount of work required to reach them. You can’t walk a book back from being published just by taking it off of Amazon and then pitching it around to publishers in hopes of connecting to a bigger audience.

Self-publishing often seems like a shortcut to success as an author, but the authors who earn an income this way spend anywhere from one hour a week to 20 hours a week marketing their books.

Traditionally published authors at least have some allies in process, whether it’s access to distribution channels that serve local bookstores or limited publicity assistance in advance of publication.

When you’re self publishing you’re either doing it all yourself or paying someone else to work with you. Before parntering with any self-publishing company, hybrid press, or vanity press, do your research to make sure they’re legit.

No matter which path you choose, you are going to be the biggest promoter of your book. Make sure all that time is well spent by thinking about your author goals before you publish and doing your research to make sure any potential partner is legit, rather than experiencing regret when you find out after the fact that you were sold a false bill of goods.