People will say, “everything is a chemical”. “Water is a chemical.” Most of us know what that means — we all learnt at some point that water is H2O. We all get the “H2Glow” punny product names. Water is two hydrogens attached to an oxygen. Right, but that’s different — obviously we know water is safe. (And don’t get me started on when people say poison ivy is natural. Nobody is out here trying to put poison ivy on their face, okay?!) Really, when we’re talking in everyday conversation about chemicals in beauty (is it just me?) we mean the ones with long complicated names which are impossible to pronounce, and the Google Images results are filled with zigzag lines and hexagons. One look at an ingredients list and we could tell you if it’s chemical or natural, just based on whether we can actually read it. (And we’d instantly know to avoid anything with poison ivy in it. *eye roll*) For example, we could probably have guessed that rosewater comes from roses, whereas who the heck knows what phenethyl alcohol is. Doesn’t that sound like something to avoid?

“Everything is a chemical” — whatever that means.

So here’s the thing: rosewater is just plain old water, filled with chemicals. Like phenethyl alcohol. And nonadecane, methyl eugenol and henicosane (I don’t know how to say that last one out loud). There are a whole bunch of chemicals that make it specifically rosewater instead of any other kind of water. It’s the same story for rose oil, except that also has a few types of damascenone in it (Agarwal et al., 2005). The only thing that makes rosewater and rose oil natural is that a plant made it instead of a person in a lab. But we know what it’s made of and in theory could make the same stuff, even more consistently because we wouldn’t be affected by a bad rose-harvesting season (I don’t know if that’s a thing but you know what I mean — bad weather can ruin natural ingredient batches in ways we can’t easily control). The reason chemicals have such weird names is because there’s almost an infinite number of possible chemical compounds (just made up of different atomic combinations), so scientists have to come up with names just to tell them apart. Trust me, you’d do the same if you were in charge of an infinite number of kids. The names would get pretty wacky.

Well then, since it’s all just different mixtures of chemicals, why do we bother with natural ingredients at all? Because nature is brilliant — seriously. Nature uses enzymes (specially evolved biological blobs) to pull chemicals around and make the ones it needs. And it makes it look easy. But us in a lab — we’re not so elegant, and tend to bash our chemicals together and hope it will make the ones we want (that’s a massive oversimplification of chemical synthesis but you get the gist). Often we’ll go out and find the bits we want from nature and then build on that. Our planet is amazing and I wish we were better at looking after it, but that’s a conversation for another day.