You can’t visit Bear Canyon, now. Both the drive-in Switzer picnic area and the hike-in Gabrieleño trail are closed because of COVID-19.

Besides, it’s April. A few acorns have managed to sink a root into the soil. The rest have been collected by squirrels, bored into by pests, or rotted out by mold.

But I’ve been thinking about these oaks a lot during quarantine. This last winter I made half a dozen visits to the grove learning how to forage.

No matter how heavy or shiny an acorn, I learned, if it has a weevil pinhole in the shell, throw it away. If you shake the nut and it rattles, in December that could mean mold. But in January, a loose kernel could mean the meat has shrunk back from the test and will be easier to shell and clean.

I grew up around oak trees. In grade school my class took a field trip to the American River to see the mortar holes where the Maidu ground their acorns into meal. Even as a kid, the idea of collecting food from nature was deeply appealing. My friends and I dug up cluster lily bulbs and chewed on miner’s lettuce. But processing acorns — shelling, grinding, leaching — required more effort than we were willing to give as eight-year-olds.

For the last few years, though, as I’ve finally been thinking seriously about climate change and ecological collapse, economic inequality and food insecurity, the acorn keeps visiting me as a metaphor.

From the Kizh at the base of the San Gabriels in the south; to the Wintu on the steps of the Siskyous in the north; to the Ohlone and the Chumash on the western coast; to the Maidu and the Miwok and the Paiute in the foothills of the Sierras to the east: The Native Californians had no agriculture. They gathered blackberries, figs, milk thistle, olives, soaproot, yucca, buckeyes, piñons, stinging nettle, prickly pears, seaweed. They hunted deer, grizzly, quail, grasshoppers, raccoons, wood rats, doves, lizards, jackrabbits, antelope. They scavenged whale carcasses that washed up on the beaches.

But mainly they ate acorns.

The oak trees — self-propagating orchards that require no irrigation, no pruning, no fumigation—gave so exuberantly each fall that the harvest lasted the native tribes all year. Until the Spanish invaded with their wheat and barley and maize, no one had intentionally grown anything in California for 15,000 years.

If you know how to see it, the land gives everything. But like almost everyone around me, I didn’t know how to see it.

Then last fall my wife came home from a hike in the mountains with a picture on her phone: an oak trunk skirted with thousands of mahogany acorns.

“Look how many there are!” she exclaimed. “Every tree was like that.”

The significance of the photo didn’t sink in immediately. But I woke a couple mornings later with a thought turning over in my mind. One in 10,000 acorns becomes a tree. The rest are given back to the other residents of the forest, from the microbes to the humans, as food.

What would the Kizh— the Chumash, the Maidu, the Wintu — think of us leaving all their acorns to rot?