Historically, there’s been a stigma against people with conditions such as autism, ADHD, and dyslexia, who are not typically considered to be top job candidates. A new body of data, however, suggests that people with conditions like this can be a major asset in the workplace. And a growing number of companies are choosing to embrace a movement toward neurodiversity.

The term neurodiversity was coined in the late 1990s by sociologist Judy Singer. The premise is that differences in cognitive functioning are simply variations of the human brain and should be considered assets rather than setbacks. As someone who is herself on the autism spectrum, Singer believes these differences “should be recognized and respected as a social category, similar to ethnicity, socioeconomic class, sexual orientation, gender, or disability.”

The promise of neurodiversity

Framing cognitive differences like this allows us to focus on the gifts of the neurodiverse rather than on the ways that they differ from the norm. These gifts can be formidable. “Many people with these disorders have higher-than-average abilities; research shows that some conditions, including autism and dyslexia, can bestow special skills in pattern recognition, memory, or mathematics,” explains Robert D. Austin, faculty director of the Learning Innovation Lab at Ivey Business School. He adds that the neurodiverse might face certain challenges with the workplace environment, and require special accommodation, but the benefits of expanding the idea of how a “professional” looks and acts are well worth it.

An employer who focuses on making sure a potential employee is a “good fit” with existing norms will miss these benefits. Someone with Asperger’s for example, may struggle with social interaction and nonverbal communication, but they may be able to maintain deep focus, have an incredible attention to detail, and a natural aptitude for recognizing patterns.

Companies that are leading the way

More companies adjusting their HR processes to support the neurodiverse, with notable examples including Microsoft, Goldman Sachs, Hewlett Packard Enterprise, Ford, and SAP. Microsoft recently recognized that the traditional interview process could be frustrating to neurodivergent candidates and harm their recruiting efforts. To combat the problem, they partnered with Specialisterne, a socially innovative company that helps leverage the talent of people with ASD. By switching to a more relaxed four-day process rather than a standard interview, they offered people with autism, ADHD, dyslexia, and other cognitive conditions a chance to better demonstrate their talents.

Goldman Sachs has even gone so far as to launch a Neurodiversity Hiring Initiative — an eight-week paid internship program specifically designed for neurodivergent people. Individuals receive comprehensive training on how to leverage their talents and integrate themselves into the workplace. Those who perform well are eligible for a full-time offer from Goldman Sachs. The end goal is to position participants for long-term career success and fully unlock their skills.

How one man’s challenge became his biggest asset

At age 11, Rob Surrat was diagnosed with ADHD and a learning disability. He struggled in school, and failed his first semester in college. After transferring schools, Surrat eventually graduated and became an assistant vice president at State Street Bank, a leading financial services company.

He was initially careful to conceal his condition from his employer and colleagues. “I worked hard at hiding my ADHD-related challenges,” Surratt writes. “I didn’t want anyone to know that I am neurodiverse. I really just wanted to be like everyone else. But he was inspired by a Disability:IN conference to share his story on LinkedIn.

Being transparent about his neurodiversity turned out to be a great decision. Surratt feels that it’s a big part of his overall value and what makes him such a major asset to his company. “ADHD gives me the ability to think through a myriad topics and jump from project to project with more agility than my neurotypical peers,” he says. “I enjoy having lots of different tasks and I love constant change. I realize now that I’m also a strategic thinker who often sits outside of the box with my ideas and resolutions.”

Benefits beyond brand image

Embracing neurodiversity is more than a feel-good move. It can dramatically increase productivity. “After three to six months working in the Mortgage Banking Technology division, autistic workers were doing the work of people who took three years to ramp up — — and were even 50 percent more productive,” says James Mahoney, chief quality officer for Mortgage Banking Technology.

The movement to support neurodiverse workers and benefit from their gifts is still in its infancy. It’s clear that embracing neurodiversity can create a more unified workforce and be a catalyst for innovation. But the burden of successfully integrating the neurodiverse into the workplace can’t fall only, or even mainly, on the neurodiverse themselves. The first step is for companies to open their imaginations — and their HR policies — to new ways of working and collaborating. The benefits will blow minds of every type.