“I’m not moving” my brother insisted and, true to his word, he lay back down on the grass and closed his eyes.

That morning, three of us had cycled from the coastal town of Palma Nova up to the small mountain village of Galilea. The final ascent to 460 metres above sea level was steep and meandering. It demanded a certain level of fitness. At the time, my buddy and I were training for a half-ironman. We found the 18 kilometre climb challenging but manageable.

My brother, on the other hand, had no such cycling experience.

He used to be pretty athletic. As a kid in Canada, my brother was labelled MVP of his local ice hockey team. That wasn’t his only accolade. Before emigrating from England, he was called up to his school’s first team in football and rugby. He was a natural athlete and I envied him for it. I was the runt of the family and I often lamented that I wasn’t as strong, tall and agile.

As fate would have it, my brother became a film producer and editor. In stark contrast, I now work as a fitness coach. Whilst I was in the gym, he spent many of his adult years hunched over a computer. At 36, he didn’t cut the sleek, athletic figure that once graced the sports field. Three-quarters of the way up the road to Galilea, he dismounted his bicycle, forced to walk the last few kilometres.

When my brother finally arrived at the summit, my friend and I afforded him a short toilet break. After five long minutes, we called his name but only heard our cry’s echo off the bare mountainside.

When we found him he was laying in a puddle of his own sweat on the shaded lawn behind the church. He looked miserable. We both laughed.

Despite the downhill ride back to the coast, my brother insisted, “I’m not moving.” I found it ironic because ‘not moving’ was partly responsible for him being less fit and more overweight than the rest of us.

“It’s okay, we’ll just roll you down the hill” I joked.

When he still didn’t budge, I became slightly more hostile in my words and tone.

“Come on you fat bastard” I jeered, “You need this more than any of us.”

I’ll be honest, I couldn’t empathise with how that made him feel. Like most people who ‘fat-shame’, I’ve always been slim and have never had to struggle with being overweight.

Like many people who stigmatise, I hid behind noble intentions; that I was just trying to get him moving; that I said those words for his own good. But I’d be lying to myself and in that regard, I’m not alone.