Why Sticking to Your Training Plan is Vital

The new normal of tomorrow may require sticking to your plan today to be prepared

Training photo by Chase Kinney (@chasekinney) on Unsplash

When I read the news that Western States 100 was cancelled, I was disappointed. Not because I qualified. I haven’t yet. No, it was something much deeper.

A June 100-mile race means that the bulk-up part of your training begins the middle of March and reaches a huge high around the middle to end of May before you start tapering.

That means your high mileage weeks started right about the time that this vicious virus really started to kick into high hear in the United States.

All of a sudden, you are faced with a situation that no runner ever imagined they would be in.

Your initial response is most likely to toss your training plan into the nearest garbage can and start eating everything in sight.

I believe it is important psychologically to stay on your training plan. You will most likely need to adjust where you are running. However, just stopping isn’t the answer and this is important whether you are training for a 5K, a half-marathon, a marathon or even an ultra-marathon.

These are some easy steps to stay on track with your running and to get creative in how and where you run.

Stay as Close to Your Training Plan as Possible

Write your training plan down. Photo by Glenn Carstens-Peters (@glenncarstenspeters) on Unsplash

There are many training plans out there so I’m not going to go into details about actual training plans.

In general, a training plan will look something like this if you are training for a marathon:

Week 1–30 total miles, 5 running days

Week 2–33 total miles, 5 running days

Week 3–36 total miles, 5 running days

Week 4–32 total miles, 5 running days

Week 5–38 total miles, 5 running days

Week 6–39 total miles, 5 running days

Week 7–41 total miles, 5 running days

Week 8–37 total miles, 5 running days

Week 9–37 total miles, 5 running days

Week 10–42 total miles, 5 running days

Week 11–45 total miles, 5 running days

Week 12–41 total miles, 5 running days

Week 13–38 total miles, 5 running days

Week 14–40 total miles, 5 running days

Week 15–28 total miles, 5 running days

Race Week — 4 easy days of running

As you can tell, this means if you had your target race the last week in June, you began your sixteen-week training plan the beginning of February. By the end of March, you are into Week 8 with a bounce down two-week period before you ramp up madly in week two of April.

By staying as close to your training plan as possible, all the discipline that you have developed to get to this point will not be wasted and it will be far easier to train for a race in the future.

One of the most difficult things to do mentally as a runner is to stop training at all for a race and then attempt to start ramping back up in order to be prepared for an upcoming race. I learned this the hard way and I would love for you to be able to learn from my experience instead of trying to do this yourself.

A couple of years ago when I was working for a company as their National Salesperson, I was traveling all over the United States and signed up for four marathons in six weeks in six different states. It was rather insane, but I cruised through the first five marathons finishing all of them in what for me is a really good time.

During the sixth marathon, around mile 22, I was coming around a sharp curve with a group of runners and got squeezed up against the curb. As I backed off to give myself a little bit of room, I took my eyes off the road ahead of me and the next thing I know I am lying on the ground with a seriously twisted ankle. I limped across the finish line and that is when my challenges began.

Wisely, I chose to take care of my injured ankle and did no running for about three weeks. Around the three-week time frame, a friend of mine called and asked if I wanted to run an upcoming marathon in two weeks because his wife backed out and he already had a bib that the race director agreed to transfer to me for a small fee.

Since I am an addict and my ankle felt great, I decided that two weeks was plenty of time to prepare for a marathon since I had just completed six of them three weeks before then.

The sixth marathon was an absolute disaster. Mentally, not physically. Physically, I felt fantastic. My legs were strong and even though there were a couple of small hills that gave my cardio problems, there was nothing wrong physically.

Mentally, I was a mess. I cannot remember how many times I wanted to quit. The first time was around mile three when I told my buddy I just didn’t have it and he should just go on without me. I had never had this happen to me before so I was really freaked out.

After the race, as I assessed what had happened, I realized that the three weeks off training were good physically to heal my ankle but by not pushing myself, I had lost that mental edge that is necessary to run at a high level.

Ever since then, even with the relatively few injuries I have had, I have fought through and kept to my training plan. Not for what it does physically, but for what staying on a training plan does for me mentally. It keeps me sharp; it helps me know that I can fight through pain and difficulties, it gives me something to focus on other than what isn’t going right.

In the culture we are in right now, that last point is the number one reason you should stick to your training plan as closely as possible.

Running will help you focus on something other than what isn’t going right.

Keep Your Training Fun

Keep it fun and laugh a lot. Photo by Mi Pham (@phammi) on Unsplash

Now that you know that you need to stick to your plan if you want to come out the other side of this virus hell mentally ready to tackle the next challenge, you need to find ways to make your training fun.

With shelter in place orders steadily going out across the country, taking off for a twenty-mile run around your city may not be the wisest choice in the world. However, how can you take that same twenty-mile run and make it fun?

Here are some things I have recently done with mid-week ten-mile and weekend twenty-mile runs.

Take a ten-mile run and create a half mile loop around your neighborhood. Ask your neighbors to come outside occasionally on one of your loops and either cheer or jeer you.

I had fun with this the other evening after work when I set out for my twenty laps around my block and had some neighbors come out and do both.

One older gentleman that I have made trips to the grocery store came out and offered to trip me so I could find out what it’s like to be old and not have balance anymore. I’m still not sure if he was serious or not. A couple of neighbor kids made up some cute signs that I should have taken pictures of. Another neighbor has crowned me the Corona-virus Running King.

I will say, it was boring as hell running around the same group of houses twenty times but it was fun getting other people to keep their social distance but to cheer and jeer me on.

A couple of Saturdays ago, I set up a .06-mile loop around my warehouse and decided to run a twenty-mile training run. Every two miles I would switch directions and run the opposite way.

Do you have any idea what running around a warehouse 335 times in 4:52:06 is like?

Loopy, downright loopy.

I’ve done scavenger hunt six- and eight-mile runs. Make a list of fun stuff to try and find on a run and then go off and safely try and find those items.

I’m still trying to find a four-leaf clover. Maybe I’ll have more luck once the snow melts.

Try running in place for an hour. Seriously, go try it. I have no idea how many “miles” I ran, but it was an interesting hour.

“Tell me again WHY you’re doing this”.

“Try facing the other way, I want to watch your butt for a while.”

“You do realize you’re insane, right?”

The more fun you can make these runs, the more you will stick to your training plan and the better off you will be when this whole thing is over and we can figure out what the new normal is.

Perhaps that last sentence is the one thing we can all take from this serious virus. This doesn’t matter if you are a runner, a walker, a body builder or whatever your pursuit is.

There is going to be a new normal once this virus gets under control and we can all get back to work and stop hoarding toilet paper again.

The better you prepare yourself today for the new normal, the better off you will be mentally, emotionally and physically for what’s coming in the future.

So, today take care of yourself and stick to some old habits because not a single one of us can predict what the future will hold.