Why I Fear This Virus Has Changed Me Forever

Instead of “phase one” bringing you relief, it may make your fears worse than ever before

Image by Christo Anestev on Pixabay

My thirteen-year-old daughter has wandered into a deep depression during the quarantine. She’s sleeping a lot of the day, and the rest of the time she’s either lying in bed or sitting sullenly in a corner scrolling social media like a zombie.

Me? I have those days a lot, but usually, there’s enough of that magic dust called hope to help me put my feet on the ground. And to keep a recent portion of good juju going, I’ve been throwing myself into spring cleaning.

So with a two-fold desire to lift my daughter’s spirits and make my more home more beautiful, I decided we would get out of the house to go to one of those stores labeled “essential,” but one that also contained a little bit of home decor inside as well.

I promised myself it would be a short trip, only 30 minutes. Just to get my daughter and me away from home and remind ourselves that there was a world outside of the grocery store.

And to be honest, as a person with extreme anxiety in general, I’ve only gone into a grocery store once or twice in the seven weeks since the school that I worked at closed due to the pandemic. I leave those particular excursions to my husband, who is a bit more emotionally resilient than me.

So today’s venture was a big step. I gathered my daughter and I’s masks, hand sanitizer, and even soaked a washcloth in 70 percent alcohol and stuck it inside a food storage bag to wipe down anything I might really want to actually touch.

Before we entered, I reminded my daughter of the rules: at least six feet of space, no touching of the face, etc. I also told her she was not to wander away from me, as I wanted to make sure she followed those rules of which I just reminded her.

I was so excited. A trip out shopping like it used to be, I told myself.

But what happened was a bitter pill to swallow. One that took my hopes of a world that might be working its way back soon into a state of semi-normalcy and crushed them into dust.

We walked into the store and I immediately wiped the cart handle with my disinfecting wipes. We then proceeded down an aisle and suddenly an overwhelming sense of panic overcame me. When I have panic attacks, it is always hard to breathe, but something about the fact that all that air was trapped inside a mask made it even worse.

I pushed myself to continue walking, but I wasn’t even really looking at the things I came to see. The ragged breaths continued and the pounding of my heart increased, and I repeated to myself “This is going to be fun.” It was a sentence my spirit wanted to be true but one that at my mind was discovering was not.

The joys I had previously found in shopping were gone. Every turn down a new aisle meant another masked bandit. Every object that managed to capture my attention, every item that inspired me enough to give into my longing to touch, was followed by panic. Whose hands had been there? How long ago had they handled the same item I did?

Long story short, we went to get the one thing we actually came for, a new poster frame for my daughter’s American Horror Story picture, and quickly headed to the checkout.

My hands were shaking as I laid the frame underneath the plexiglass opening so that the cashier could scan it, my breathing even more erratic since that six-foot gap had suddenly closed, and the plexiglass frame separating me from the cashier felt like a joke, a toy sword made of cheap plastic that was supposed to protect me from death.

I paid and my daughter and I grabbed our bags and left. And I immediately tore my mask off and inhaled the sweet air that only a nose uncovered could appreciate.

Thank God it was over.

Photo by engin akyurt on Unsplash

And at that moment, when I could finally think clearly instead of using all my mental resources to fight off a panic attack, my heart broke.

I guess I was thinking that somewhere in the next month as the world started to peep out of its hiding places, I would feel free. Like I used to.

In my head, I had imagined the beauty of an outdoor barbeque with a very few select loved ones under a glorious June sky.

But the masked bandits would still be there, disguised as friends whom I loved and missed.

And the utensils they would use which I would have to gather after they left, the folding chairs they would touch which I would have to put back into their proper place would fill my soul once again with the fear that one poisonous droplet of saliva could meet my skin. And then that I might, in a moment of thoughtlessness, do unknown danger to myself or my family when I wiped away the sweat of a sultry summer day from my forehead with that same infected hand.

In my mind, I journeyed even farther into the future and asked myself, how could I enjoy a trip to a restaurant, even one that limited capacity, one who was a “good little boy or girl” and followed all the safety rules?

Yes, I know my thoughts sound a bit dramatic, but the feelings that birthed these ideas were raw and real to me when I walked into the store with my daughter.

And I wondered that if on top of having a panic disorder and borderline OCD, I had suddenly also become agoraphobic. Would this be another hurdle I would have to jump over before I could feel safe again? Would I truly ever feel safe again? Phase one, phase two, and that glorious phase three. Would they really unravel the tightly tied knots that were formed in the last two months?

I have my doubts.

The bottom line

Emily Dickinson says that “hope is the thing with feathers that perches in the soul and sings the tune without the words, and never stops at all.”

But today, my feathers were plucked away by fear, a fear I thought would dissipate as restrictions were slowly lifted and people walked out their door to go someplace other than their mailbox.

And I was left gutted, naked wings too shaky to fly about on. Hope stopped that day, at least for the time being.

And maybe the feathers will grow back, maybe one day I will soar off into the sky thrilled by the anticipation of what glorious places my newly grown plumage will take me.

But it will be a while longer. I fear a long, long while longer.