You should never have to explain elements of your story to your readers.

For example, when you’re in a writing workshop, you might as the author feel the need to explain everything— especially when the other members of your workshop begin discussing an element of your work that confuses them.

Whether you’re a part of a workshop, or if you’re just talking to a person who read your latest work and wants to give you feedback, you the writer will always want to explain things that for whatever reason didn’t make sense for the reader. You will want to make it clear that the writing isn’t the problem, it’s the person who didn’t read your writing close enough.

Now sure, it’s possible that something you wrote will make sense for 99.9% of your readers, and it just so happens that one particular person didn’t pick up on something.

But there’s about a 0.01% chance that’s the case, I’m sorry to say. Especially when two or more people don’t understand something about your story.

If a part of your story doesn’t make sense to readers, don’t explain. Instead, do another revision.

This is why beta readers are so important. This is why workshops can be helpful most of the time. You can discover what a group of people don’t understand in your latest work of fiction and then you can figure out what you need to do next to improve upon it.

Again, don’t feel the need to explain to the readers what they don’t understand. I took ten creative writing workshops over five and a half years, and this happened all the time. For the most part the author wasn’t allowed to speak during a workshop, but here and there an author would chime in, and it was usually to explain something many of the readers weren’t getting.

The explanation might be a good one, and it often is! Twenty seconds of explanation, and all the readers say, ohhhh, okay, I get it now.

But this isn’t good enough. You know why?

If your story or novel gets published, you can’t always be there to give an explanation!

Your novel gets published, and when a reader sits down to read your book, you’re not there to whisper explanations into your reader’s ear, so you know what? You better make sure your writing makes sense!

This is why revision is so important. This is why I always tell other writers not to stop at draft two or three but to push yourself to draft five or six, possibly more, before you start sending it out. You want to get your story or novel to the best possible place it can be.

You don’t really have an excuse to only take your fiction 85% of the way. My feeling is that if you’re going to spend months and months on a project, why not do everything you can to make sure it’s 100% what you want it to be?

So ignore the desire to explain everything. Instead let your writing speak for itself, always. And if it doesn’t?

Then it’s time for the next draft.