I write very honestly about my body image issues in my work and have since I was a teenager. I recognized early on that our culture’s oppressive standards around women’s appearance were not only dangerous to our souls but to our lives, as well. I don’t think I had a single friend who didn’t struggle with an eating disorder for at least a little while — or like me, who has struggled with disordered eating for decades.

I always knew I had to speak out against these impossible beauty standards, but also, I wanted to be honest about my journey. I think it’s wrong to position myself as someone who feels confident about her own appearance. That’s not fair to the women who are trying to dig their way out of this — the last thing they need is to feel bad that they aren’t more confident just because I *seem* to be.

So I share with total transparency the struggles that I face, the doubts that I have, the way body dysmorphic disorder alters my vision, and the ways my value as a human being feel so inextricably tied up with my appearance.

Interestingly, one of the comments I get most from people is to stop berating myself and picking apart my appearance. To stop writing about my struggles with my appearance because I’m focusing too much on the negative and just perpetuating the problem.

First of all, let’s start with where I’m coming from. I don’t hate the way I look, though I don’t love it, either. If a genie offered to change all the parts of myself that make me feel uncomfortable about my appearance…I wouldn’t do it. I still want to see the “me” that I know in the mirror.

Writing about my experiences and perspectives of myself has been incredibly healing for me. I am the kind of person who needs to go into my dark woods and face the scary wolves. I need to get to know them, to strip down to my skin and expose myself in total vulnerability to them. I need to allow those fears and uncomfortable feelings to arise, to experience them, and to know that they cannot actually hurt me.

It’s helped me even more to “face” myself on film — to take photos of myself and not only that but to share them with the world. Nothing is more terrifying to me than to post a photo of my ass or my stretch marks or my fleshy hips or my damaged skin. And yet once I have faced that darkness, I not only feel stronger, but so much more at peace with my body.

Sharing my insecurities and body image issues is not an attempt berate myself or judge myself. On the contrary, it’s my effort to understand myself and to befriend those shadowy parts of my soul.

Secondly, as someone who wants to help other women free themselves from the damage our culture inflicts on us, I owe them my honesty.

When I post a photo on Instagram that’s five years old, or has been heavily filtered, I insist on being clear about that. I think our perfectly curated, softly filtered social media feeds are dangerous, making us all feel like our lives and our bodies should look like something out of a catalog. So I will insist on adding a “social media disclaimer” in my posts to make sure people know that I look young in a particular photo because I was 35 when I took that photo. Or that my skin looks great because I used three different filters on that photo to make it look gauzy and romantic.

There are lots of times when I want my Instagram photos to create a mood — but that’s art. That’s expression. That’s not necessarily reality. And I feel that it’s important to be very clear and transparent about the difference between my art and my real life.

I also feel a responsibility to every woman who struggles with body image and particularly to those who have body dysmophic disorder. I’m getting better at creating more balance when it comes to focusing a little more on the positive aspects of my body, but people who have deeply-rooted psychological issues around their body image know that focusing on the positive isn’t enough to heal. We’ll only be covering over those deep, damaging, scary feelings we have about our bodies and trust me, the pressure will build and build until it pops. I have found that it’s best to let all that stuff out in a slow, controlled stream, to acknowledge those feelings, to face them and examine them again and again.

Unless it is unequivocally true, I will never write about how much I accept every flaw that I have because I’m not going to give women one more reason to feel inadequate, as if they aren’t good enough feminists, as if they weren’t strong enough to disentangle themselves from the patriarchy the way I supposedly did.

Obviously, I want to get there — to get to the place where I never again feel insecure about my body. Where I love it without judgment or shame. I’d love to even get to the point where I can wear a bathing suit in public, post a photo of my ass on social media without cringing, let my muffin top bulge from beneath a crop top. I’d love to at least set that example (and I’m getting closer every day).

But I’m not convinced that any human being is confident in their appearance all or even most of the time and I don’t believe that it’s ultimately healthy (for me, at least) to ignore my insecurities in favor of positive thoughts and affirmations. I don’t want to model to any woman that it’s not okay to struggle with body image, especially considering how our culture has gone out of its way to pull this incredibly damaging mindfuck on us.

We are all in process and that’s okay. We are all recovering and that’s okay. I think it’s okay to talk about it and I think it’s okay to be honest about our feelings — even when they aren’t positive.

From my perspective, I have a responsibility to other women to share my journey in the most honest way possible — which includes those “social media disclaimers” and admitting that I struggle with my appearance.

And more importantly, I also feel that it’s my responsibility to not just say but demonstrate that I am determined to find and believe in my worth beyond that.

© Yael Wolfe 2020