Where did they go wrong?

1. “Our money is more important than yours”: antagonizing their customers

On the obvious surface level, MOIC’s popularity can be attributed to its founders’ timely capitalization on the well-documented generational shift in consumer preference — a pivot to premium experiences rather than luxury goods. The company’s founder, Maryellis Bunn, describes being inspired by the experience of being a bored millennial in New York. “New York has institutions that have been around forever but there’s nothing new,” she said in an interview.

When it first launched, MOIC had waiting lists that were months long, unsurprising considering pop-ups and traveling exhibitions are limited in nature and derive desire from exclusivity and subsequent FOMO in others. However, MOIC’s continued popularity seems contradictory with its expansion as a permanent fixture with millions of visitors.

The Instagram aesthetic and experience economy is rarely solely about exclusivity anyways. Here’s an example — for years, Horseshoe Bend was only popular with nearby residents; now, it’s one of the country’s most Instagrammed destinations. Almost 2 million tourists visited in 2018 to capture the popular image of hiking boots dangling above the bend. The Instagram account insta_repeat captures it perfectly — it posts near-identical images of cliche or popular attractions by users to show the herd-thinking of “doing it for the ‘gram.” People aren’t flocking to MOIC because other people aren’t.

Katy Perry at MOIC. Source: Instagram

Instead, it seems more likely that MOIC’s charm is FOMO derived partially from a certain aspirational lifestyle. Posting a picture in the sprinkle pool puts you in the likes of Beyonce and Katy Perry. It’s the closest your Instagram posts might look to an influencer’s, in fact, you’re indulging in a space that encourages you to act like one. It’s an experience that comes up with a specific price tag, like pictures taken with Minnie Mouse ears at Disneyland ($29.99 for the ears, $100-$200 for Disneyland tickets). The evidence — angry comments left on MOIC’s Instagram — reveal that, for many visitors, tickets are a splurge. For some, the lack of a $200 refund could mean going hungry for the week in our current crisis, though we have to take these comments with a grain of salt.

Even if the company’s cash flow is tight, antagonizing your customers, who potentially perceived your experience as a highly-anticipated status symbol, is brand-damaging and challenging to recover from. Some customers have publicly announced they are reporting MOIC to the Better Business Bureau.

2. Profiting in a crisis with cute, but nonessential, tchotchkes

Although the $60 “Stay home. Stay cool” self-care experience kit is on-brand, it falls a bit flat and feels out-of-touch.

Sure, people are looking to bring physical experiences into the home. Paint-by-the-number kits, jigsaw puzzles, and craft sets are booming with popularity. But an overpriced branded kit that won’t ship until May 1st — where proceeds are pocketed and not donated to charity — reminds me of those celebrities singing Imagine.

Color Factory, MOIC’s competitor, seems to understand how selling in a crisis may be perceived negatively. The company has resisted selling new merch or asking people to buy gift cards. “The thing that seems really tasteless right now to us is trying to sell our stuff, or sound aggressively commercial when we have employees that we can’t even support right now here,” its founder, Jeff Lind, said, “I think we’re beyond trying to pick up scraps of commerce right now, and we’re more in a mode of how do we contribute, and how we maintain happiness, and how do we try and keep as much normalcy as possible but being sensitive to the fact that people are hurting right now.”

MOIC’s branded products are worthless without the experiential part of its retail model. Offering ticket-holders $20 store credit while refusing to provide refunds is just another slap to the face.

3. Out-of-touch messaging fans the flames

After MOIC described itself as a “small business” in its email to customers, one ex-employee commented on Instagram that the company was being “disrespectful and insensitive to actual small businesses,” before chastising them for making her serve ice cream multiple times while sick.

It’s unsurprising that MOIC’s email messaging came off as obtuse — the company is renowned for being a behemoth in the experience economy. The founders raised $40 million in venture-capital investment that staked Figure8, the new parent company of MOIC, to a $200 million valuation to build more “experiums” (branded experiences — the company trademarked the term).

As people witness actual small businesses collapsing in their neighborhoods, their ability to see through inauthentic messaging will increase trifold. Don’t pretend to be something you’re not, especially if it’s to evoke sympathy.

4. Not immediately hiring a digital team to build out online experiences

As events from Broadway shows to tech conferences find new places online, I wondered how MOIC could pivot digitally. Although MOIC and its competitors have previously pushed against the narrative that they’re designed for little beyond Instagram photoshoots, the reality is the in-person experiences they provide aren’t replicable online.

With that being said, there are still opportunities to connect with their fans and creatively digitalize their success formulas through virtual scavenger hunts, online concerts, or exclusive streaming events for VIPs (that’ll also bring in some profit). For example, The Rosé Mansion, an interactive wine tasting adventure, is hosting virtual happy hours every Friday. “Each week will have a fun theme, a contest, a new quarantini recipe, special guest segments, birthday shoutouts and the biggest cheers on Zoom,” its team shared on Instagram.

MOIC’s founder recently said in an interview that “we are not going to become all of a sudden a digital brand, that would be against our DNA.” However, the spread of the coronavirus is profoundly altering and will continue to alter consumers’ shopping behavior with long-term repercussions as it literally hijacks our cells’ DNA infrastructure. We’re watching, in real-time, how this global pandemic is causing retailers to pivot from planning giant experiential flagships to investing in better online experiences. Consumers could get used to the efficiency, intimacy, and personalization of digital experiences, especially if shutdowns last for months. This could be the final straw for brick-and-mortar retail.

5. We’re acclimating to a new form of human connection and also, we hate consumerism now

As described in its mission statement, MOIC is “designed to be a culturally inclusive environment and community, inspiring human connection and through the universal power of ice cream” (sic). It’s true that the tour is designed to be incredibly interactive. Enthusiastic staff members guide team-building exercises where visitors must yell “scoop scoop!” or show off dance moves before proceeding to the next room. However, the “human connection” element seems to be a shallow, fleeting one — few are forking almost $50 for a ticket to make friends. Visitors forming lasting relationships seem more like fateful coincidences.

Given our new reality, conventional emotional triggers, like FOMO, are shifting. We’re connecting with people in different ways, as evidenced by the popularity of Zoom happy hours and newfound demand for apps like Houseparty. Connecting with others has never been easier.

Additionally, we’re reflecting on our values and what matters the most — family, friends, health — and admitting that our capitalistic society has been problematic. With over 6 million people suddenly unemployed and the country plunging into a recession, how many will still willingly pay for MOIC, the epitome of late-stage capitalism, an exemplar of the commodification of space and experience?

6. Sprinkles, ice cream cones, and germs galore

Although MOIC says that the materials they use in the space are already antimicrobial, with the abundance of new information on germs, disease, and personal hygiene, how many consumers will still willingly jump into a sprinkle pool in the next year?

“You can post about how much you sanitize everything, but unless you’re telling me that every single sprinkle is being cleaned, visiting your facility is not safe,” one person commented on Instagram, “People have been taking pictures with their head covered in these sprinkles which, coronavirus or not, is still pretty disgusting.”