How to Build an Intrinsically Motivated Human

We all know that one person that jumps out of bed before sunrise and deeply immerses themselves in their hobby or life work, and has abundant stores of energy to do this day after day.

So my question is, how can we use what scientists know about human behavior to cultivate an upgraded humanity that is driven from within?

Such a big question would be hard to answer without the wisdom of thinkers who have studied human motivation for years. I analyzed that Daniel Pink determined that there are 3 factors that lead to better life satisfaction, performance, and energy. Let’s unpack this magical recipe.

1. Autonomy

Humans have an urge to direct their own lives. There’s an internal need to chase directions that only we have chosen for ourselves.

In order to optimize our motivation, we must feel in complete control of what we do, how we do it, when we do it, and who we do it with.

Pink states that traditional management is awesome if the goal is compliance. However, in a cognitively demanding environment that requires creativity and constant engagement,

Self Direction is Better.

Tech giants such as Google and software developers like Atlassian know this little secret. They’ve implemented the autonomy principle by having “do whatever the fuck you want” time. Employees at Google, for example, are urged to allocate 20% of work paid time to pursue personal projects. The results have been astounding and innovative projects such as Gmail and Google News arose from this autonomous time.

So, to begin to plant the seeds for intrinsic motivation, it is essential to pursue goals, projects, and career paths that allow us to feel autonomy over our lives. We must wake up feeling that the choices we make are self-directed and not imposed on from an external authority. In this way, our creative reservoirs will flourish and we will feel more engaged with what we choose.

2. Mastery

Humans also have the urge to get better at something. We have a need for constant improvement in a skill that we enjoy. We also want our skills to stand out from the average, and there’s a sense of satisfaction for being the best.

In my case, I was deeply motivated by being the best three-point shooter in my basketball league. That internal drive lead me to shoot hundreds of shots Saturday and Sunday mornings when everyone was asleep. The only explanation?

I was seeking mastery over a skill.

How else could you explain teenagers dedicating countless hours in front of a screen playing Fortnite or an adult that plays their guitar during their precious free time from work?

We deeply care about being good at something for the sake of it. No money, no gold medals, and no candy pops will motivate us to do these things. It comes from within.

In order to feel intrinsically motivated, we must synthesize our goals, projects, and career paths with things that allow us to pursue mastery. I write because I want to be a great writer. Kobe Bryant played basketball because in his own words,

“I want to be the best. Simple and plain. That’s why I play the game.”

3. Purpose

Having a higher sense of purpose, a mission that will provide us our own direction is the medicine for all our doubts, fears, and anxiety.

The best selling author, Robert Greene, dedicated a whole chapter in his book Laws of Human Nature that talked about advancing our life with a sense of purpose.

He argues that we all have the right to discover our life’s work, which he says, is “what we were intended to do”. I know you may be thinking that I’m going off on some spiritual tangent, but hear me out.

Greene states that in order to align with our life’s work, we must learn to listen to what he calls, “the voice”. This is the voice of guidance, clarity, and wholeness.

There are many ways to begin to open our ears to that inner voice of intuition. Some may say through meditation, and others may say through immersing ourselves in deep reflection. I have no preference.

However, there is something that I know to be true.

Every single human being was gifted with a one-of-a-kind genetic makeup. Our brains are all wired differently because no two people will ever have the exact same experiences or personality. As Greene says,

“Consider this uniqueness as a seed that is planted at birth, with potential growth. And this uniqueness has a purpose.”

So, the biggest factor in order to tap into the highest reserves of internal motivation is having a strong ass purpose.