High school students have been asking this question for years, and it’s about time I answered it. Reading books can help you make sense of the world in a profound way. They can help you widen your intellectual lens and see perspectives you had not imagined. Here’s an example of how this wonderful process works.

You probably read Ray Bradbury’s, Fahrenheit 451 in high school . If you don’t remember it, you may want to add it to your reading list, as it is a brilliant predictor of the dystopian societal shifts that are facing all of us in 2020. Of course, Bradbury ‘s book was published in 1953. Unlike us, he was worried about the growing popularity of television and its influence on society. However, I re-read it recently, and found it to be oddly prescient. I could have settled for an online summary, but I read it again, because reading it makes me think as I go, makes me engage with each powerful idea, and makes the writer’s words resonate with me long after I’ve put it to rest.

In fact, as I read, I started to draw all sorts of parallels between Montag’s world and my own. He describes the walls of his living room as huge screens that entertain his wife, Millie, and engage her in eerie , disjointed conversations. The television is always on and he and Millie can never seem to have a conversation without the incessant chatter of her television “family” in the background. Right away, I can see similarities with my own existence. I’m stuck in my house doing on-line teaching for a few hours a day. Then, I listen to NPR for an hour or so, next is a quick check of social media, an hour of the NY Times, The News Hour at 7 p.m., more news at 10:00 p.m. and an hour of reading every night before bed. I may as well be surrounded by the media wall at this point, such is the saturation. However, unlike Millie, it’s not too late. I can turn off any of the channels I’ve mentioned and still live in a quiet home. I suppose Millie could have turned off the television walls, too, but she is too far gone to acknowledge her own lack of thinking. Bradbury’s novel describes a dystopian world where people are rendered powerless to defend themselves against the onslaught of information. Hmmm….sound familiar?

Ray Bradbury, in 1950, predicted a world without books.

Rest assured, we need books more than ever. We need classics to see what great thinkers came up with before we came on the scene. We need history books, mysteries, fiction, non-fiction, fantasy- all of it. We especially need to read the books that are banned, and the ones that people want to ban because the ideology expressed in those books doesn’t agree with their moral or religious values.

Bradbury wrote Fahrenheit 451 in feverish haste. In the Audio Introduction to his book, he explains that he wrote the book on a dime- a- half-hour typewriter in the basement of the UCLA Library. He points out the irony of writing about burning books in a library. He explains his reason for writing, “I don’t want to be a Democrat or a Republican or a Communist or a Fascist, or -just an all-American. I wanted to be, as far as I can be, myself, and find out what I think….” This is the essence of his book and another great reason for reading books .

We can have a discussion of the canon and how exclusive or inclusive it actually is, but books must be read and analyzed if we want educated citizens who can consider contradictory ideas and make an argument that shows their understanding, not their disdain, for one side or the other. Bradbury was afraid that censorship, the appropriation of ideas by malignant oligarchs, would deprive people of their own ability to be rational and think for themselves. He feared the ever-growing power of a society that is inflamed by its own history.

In his dystopian novel, he shows us a world where cars whiz by at deadly speeds, with no safeguards for pedestrians. I thought about the self-driving cars that are on the horizon for us. Will they care about pedestrians or humans who get in their way? His wife, Millie, walks around in a comatose state with Seashell radio plugs in her ears so that the music emanating from them prevents her from thinking. I think of the earbuds, the cell phones, the apps, the games, the virtual reality innovations-everything that consumes our consciousness to the point of numbness. She talks to the walls of her house who are always involved in a virtual reality show. She refers to them as “family. “

Without books, schools that teach critical thinking skills, and a society which freely discusses books, Bradbury’s vision may become a disturbing reality.

Burning books, or just not reading any, amounts to the same thing: the destruction of free thinking. Bradbury’s vision of a future where people have a vacuous understanding of their lives outside of the ubiquitous noise of the virtual walls is becoming our reality. Are we in danger of becoming, like Millie, trapped by our own technological advancements?