My mom finally took me to a doctor about the brain symptoms in high school, which I will always be grateful to her for. But the doctor smiled and patted me on the shoulder and told me I was an “intelligent and sensitive” young woman and asked if I’d like to try some antidepressants. He didn’t give me an MRI or any kind of neurological test, but told my mom I was fine. After his assertion, some family and friends started relating to me like I was a little fragile... paranoid, hyper-sensitive, “fear-based”… yuck. The neurological symptoms continued for a couple more years before I had an MRI and the brain tumor was found. Until then, because a person of authority had told us a prettier story, we tried to ignore the natural warnings that my life was giving me.

We acted like they were a weakness instead of a strength.

The week I began writing this essay, our American president went on national TV to pat us all on the shoulder and tell us that Nothing Is Wrong and Everything’s Fine. We’re all doing a great job, his people are doing a great job, and while Covid-19 is a serious subject that his serious administration is taking seriously, everything should clear up by April. Two weeks later, as the spread of the virus ramped up into that scary vertical part of an exponential curve and hospitals in some cities reached maximum capacity, he told us the pandemic would be over by Easter, and that churches should be packed then. “Wouldn’t that be nice?” he said, “I’d love to see it.” This is also a pretty story.

To be clear, I see nothing wrong with optimism or positivity. Rooting for the home team, saying positive affirmations, or projecting confidence in the face of adversity can all serve helpful purposes. But being positive doesn’t require denial. We can very squarely face our problems, grieve them, take care of life responsibly and proceed positively. The trouble comes when we ignore a problem that needs our attention, and make up a story about a happier reality instead. In the case of this pandemic, while our president was busy telling a happy story early on, he wasn’t taking necessary steps to save people’s lives. If our country’s leadership had reckoned with the danger and taken protective action faster, the disease would still exist, but we might not be in a situation where medical workers are dropping from exhaustion and working without protection, convention centers are being turned into hospitals, and most of us know people who are sick or have died from the virus.

This equation of Denial + Positive Storytelling is the relational physics I’m interested in bringing folks’ attention to. It’s one that can operate at any level — in a body, a partnership, a family or a country — and cause harm on any level. I see it work like this:

Step 1: Disturbance in the Force. First, we get a warning from life. Some feeling or data point lets us know life needs our help in some way. This could be an arm going numb, a pain inside a body, a gut-feeling in a romantic relationship, or a sense of unease within a company. It could be warning signs of instability within an economic or medical system, or a government. It could be natural or scientific warnings of a climate crisis (the Kyoto Protocol was first set out 23 years ago), or it could be Dr. Li Wenliang in Wuhan, China. Whatever the signal, life is sometimes gracious enough to give us a window of opportunity to take life-saving action.

Step 2: Denial Ain’t a River. The second part of this pattern is that we ignore the warning. We dismiss and ignore the signals that natural life sends us because they’re upsetting, or because we feel helpless to handle them. So we keep partying, shopping, binging, working, going down to Florida for spring break. We don’t address the unspoken pain in a relationship, check in with our middle school kid, get the lump checked, or report workplace harassment, because we’re scared.

Step 3: Story Time! On top of the denial, we spin a happier, less painful story about the state of our union, large or small. We indulge in stories like “We’re doing fine!” “Racism is over!” “Ron doesn’t have a drinking problem!” “Climate change is a hoax!” “Sexism doesn’t happen anymore!” “It’s all in your head!” “This pandemic thing is being blown out of proportion!” If we can believe these happier stories, then it seems alright that we’re not taking action. But while we’re busy telling them, the problem is getting worse.

Step 4: Crisis Gives Permission. Sometimes, once a problem is really beating down our door, we suddenly feel permission to address it. Once the waters are high or the diagnosis is bad or the company is falling apart, we’ll suddenly give ourselves full permission to take care of life. This feeling of permission is why some people mention a quiet gratitude for a medical diagnosis that finally gives them sanction to take care of themselves. It’s why there’s a thread of awe that runs through any large-scale crisis, where we’re moved by how beautifully people are “finally coming together.” Crisis gives us permission to take care of life inside and around us in heroic ways that we might actually want to, all of the time. It allows us to live life like it matters. But the practice of waiting for a crisis in order to take care of life doesn’t work. Because by that point, it’s usually too late.

I wonder if you’ve seen this pattern operate anywhere in your own life. And I wonder if you’ve wondered about it, too. Given the grace of a warning signal and a precious window of opportunity to save life, why would we not? After a lifetime of thinking about it, I have an idea. I don’t know if an idea can be of life-saving value to anyone else, but this one was for me.

In college, the falling sensation got worse and I started losing chunks of time. So I went to a new doctor. Without tests, he dismissed my body’s warning signals the same way the last doctor had, complete with shoulder-pat. He called me “bright and sensitive” and offered me Prozac, though I wasn’t depressed. I kept going to school, getting good grades, acting in plays, spending time with good friends, and trying to reconcile the irreconcilable message that the natural warnings I was getting were my fault. A year later, I had a dream.

The dream was a different sort of thing. In it, I was cast in a play as a woman who had a four-year-old daughter with a brain tumor. She was very sick, and I was thr-illed to play the role. Over the moon. Partly because my character was a chain smoker (I’d never been a smoker but had always wanted to) and partly because — and I remember this distinctly — I “finally got to love my daughter.” The diagnosis gave me permission to love the child unreservedly, wholeheartedly. It was a dream of a role.

As the dream went on, I ambled around getting into character, becoming the mom, overjoyed, wearing cute skinny jeans, smoking my lungs out, telling everyone about my chance to love without reservation, and I forgot my daughter for a while. When I remembered her with a jolt, I ran to find her in a place that was part hospital, part toy store. She was almost like a toy herself now: her skin plastic and clear, veins Crayola blue and red, colorful tubes connecting her to machines. The little life that I’d forgotten while I was busy reveling in the chance to love her was still breathing on life support, but I understood that she was gone.

They say that in falling dreams, you always wake up before you hit the ground. But in this dream, I didn’t. The full force of reckoning with the reality of the disease hit me like a wall, and then I became the little girl. As her, I began to die. And as I did, the world began to disappear through different senses. First sight, then sound. And then something else I can’t describe. Then I was underwater, womb-like, a tunnel, a light above me, shafts and rays shining through the surface. I swam up towards the light, with someone by my side helping me up. Dying didn’t hurt. But it was a vast, wordless sorrow because I wasn’t ready to go. Then nothing.

I can’t — you can’t, we can’t — need a crisis or an emergency to justify waking up to love life.

I woke up biting my tongue. Terrified. But also astonished, waterfalls of gratitude that I was alive. Christmas Carol-like, it 100% felt like I had just lived into the future. Or the future I was headed toward, if my trajectory didn’t change. I understood a lot of things at once. First: that I did have a brain tumor. And just as important was that I can’t — you can’t, we can’t — need a crisis or an emergency to justify waking up to love life. I understood that if we wait for some drastic diagnosis or crisis situation to give us permission to cherish, trust, and care for life, it’ll be too late. That message has rung in my ears for the rest of my life.

Home from college that summer, I went to the family doctor once more. Didn’t tell him about the dream, because I’d learned that doctors don’t always super-love it when you think you know something about your own body. But I told him about my continuing symptoms, and he sent me off again without tests. Later that summer, after I had a seizure that prevented me from talking, moving, and unclenching my jaw, they finally gave me an MRI and found it.

Confirmation that I had a tumor growing in my brain was as scary as you might imagine. That summer, I let go of a lifetime of conditioning in order to accept and allow all the scary, messy feelings I had thought made me weak — fear, rage, sorrow, confusion, need — because it seemed like I could start respecting life if I wanted to save it. Feeling emotional pain was no pleasure. But on the other side of just letting those feelings be, was a peace I hadn’t known before. A lightness that didn’t have to be forced or invented. In a way, I was relieved to have the diagnosis. Not because I wanted to be sick, or because I wanted to die, or because I wanted the seizures. Or because I wanted to focus all my attention on saving my life at a time when my friends were just beginning theirs. I wasn’t relieved at the news because I wanted that problem to be real. I was relieved at the news because the problem was already real. And by ending everyone’s denial about it, I got help.

Thankfully it was a non-malignant tumor, and still small when we found it. The next two years were dedicated to treatment, healing, and recovery. I was very lucky and, 20 years later, I’m fine. But something I learned during that time is that life can be trustworthy. I learned that its warning signals are a strength, not a weakness. Some of our thoughts are just thoughts. Some are just fear. Some are ego. Some are our own version of storytelling. But the instincts that feel like home to you — the messages life gives you that feel like the truth — are worth heeding.

Because I believe the pattern of telling pretty stories over painful realities is dangerous, and because it seems to be common practice in U.S. culture, I’m interested in bringing it to an end. Or at least bringing it to other people’s attention so that it may happen less. In order to catch this pattern in myself, and find ways of gently interrupting it, I try to be aware of its mechanics. I wonder about how the pattern gets taught to us.

A close friend of mine moved from the U.S. to Spain a few years ago, and she’s regularly astonished by the gentler speed of life there, and by the room there is to take care of it. She fell in love and got married there, and just had a baby. And throughout it all, she’s had free healthcare. She’s had birth coaching, health education, regular prenatal appointments, and birth in a hospital, all at no cost. I stand on my couch listening to her talk about the differences between life in our two countries, and we both marvel. We reflect on America’s favorite pastime of being overextended, overworked, and underserved. And how life for so many people in the U.S., at every economic level, seems to be a state of exhaustion and depletion. We talk about how slowing down to care for life seems to be the opposite of what’s encouraged by our hazing, educational, and corporate culture, and I think about how our panicked version of capitalism congratulates Americans for toughening-up via overwork, sleep deprivation, denial of pain, and the willingness to exploit human resources and ignore environmental consequences. It seems like learning to ignore and devalue life is part of our education.

I don’t know if there’s one thing in charge of delivering that message. But I know we’ve gotten it from a lot of directions. I’m no kind of expert on this subject, but it’s pretty well-known world history that colonizing religions have justified massive violence on the premise that natural life is sinful and unruly. And in more recent local history, governments and social psychologists took on the challenge of controlling “the dangerous crowd in a time of mass democracy.” We can skip across time to find the message that life is unruly and needs to be corralled by looking at “Indian Residential Schools” and asylums built for “hysterical women” during the 18- and 1900s, or by considering civil rights leaders who were assassinated during that same period. There are plenty of ways we’ve been taught to distrust, fear, and abandon our nature.

Being dismissed as irrational has a powerful stigma to it.

Regardless of which old, crusty source that message originates from, it mostly matters how it’s reinforced today, because that’s the part that’s up to us. Sometimes social corralling is administered through mockery. If a person decides to speak honestly about a concern that goes against a popular Pretty Story, they’ll often be made fun of — called “paranoid,” “too sensitive,” “conspiracy theorist,” “doomsday-ish,” etc. These labels can feel stigmatizing and ostracizing, and when they’re used on someone I care about, I notice in myself a knee-jerk desire to distance my position from theirs. Being dismissed as irrational has a powerful stigma to it. Our hardwired fear of being ostracized is based in evolutionary survival, so we don’t want to be rejected. But that fear of rejection is sometimes exploited, and we learn to wield it to keep each other on board with Pretty Stories being told. Even during a pandemic, I notice that my most sound-minded, practical friends preface any statement of reasonable economic or public health concern with, “Not to be doomsday-ish, but…” We seem embarrassed by our natural concerns about life, and overly afraid of being labeled as irrational. Even now, in the midst of a pandemic, we worry about that stigma.

We have to get over this. We have to rise above our conditioned embarrassment to trust and take care of life. Because even though we’ve been turned away from it, that desire — the desire to take care — is what unites us. Across the political spectrum, a passionate desire to care for life is motivating people to fight for the causes you care for most, and it’s motivating those who fight for the causes you find offensive and absurd. It’s very easy for me to recognize the desire to protect life in people who want to extend the stay-at-home order until we are equipped to return safely and gradually. But if I calm down and look closely, I can find the same desire to protect life motivating people who are rallying to open things back up, scared of losing their livelihoods. At the heart of every issue that divides us into political tribes is a common desire to protect life, along with the heartbroken recognition that, as a species, we’re not doing a very good job of it. Until we each recognize our own grief over this, it’ll be hard to recognize grief’s face in others.

After a lifetime of conditioning to buck up and look on the bright side, allowing ourselves a moment to slow down and grieve for the way life suffers can seem a little scary. Letting ourselves just acknowledge where life is hurting and shedding some tears can seem like weakness, or indulgence, or wallowing. It isn’t. Because by letting ourselves have small moments of honest reckoning, we realign with life. For some people there’s a fear that if we let ourselves cry a little, we won’t stop crying. To that I’ll just say that your instinct to be smart about grieving is right, and you should do it in a way that feels protected for you. I like to cry in the shower. And nature holds feelings well. A spot in nature to walk or sit while you ugly cry can do wonders. Non-judgmental attention from others can really help, too. Grief therapy is a thing if you have money or insurance, and if you don’t, there are free “warmlines” (non-emergency emotional support hotlines) and free ways to exchange support with peers. However we proceed, it’s helpful to stop being ashamed of pain. Because it is a healthy, natural reaction. And maybe most importantly, it mobilizes our healing response.

Life has an innate capacity to repair and recover, and because you are alive, you do, too.

Healing means different things to different people, and I don’t want to define it for anyone else. I’ll just share that to me it seems a natural process, as real as entropy. Healing is what our skin does after we get a cut, if we’re lucky. It’s what an island does when wildlife grows back after a nuclear test. It’s what the earth is trying to do even right now, with people driving and flying so much less. Life has an innate capacity to repair and recover, and because you are alive, you do, too. In the New Age-y ethos I mentioned earlier, the term “healing” can be equated with magical thinking and self-blame. I’m not here for any of that. People get sick. Families have problems. All of us will die. All of that is wordlessly painful. And none of it is your fault. But if you try to pretend away problems, you may miss the incomparable chance to be part of a healing process.

When I was 20 with a brain tumor, what felt like healing to me was feeling and loving as much of life as I could, regardless of what would happen with my body. I understood my peace couldn’t be conditioned upon a story that “everything’s fine,” because things weren’t fine. Life was hard then, each day, and there weren’t any guarantees that it would get easier. I definitely hoped they would, and hope was helpful. But getting to hope, and getting to want life and love life even in pain, and without any guarantees, brought me to an expanse of joy and gratitude that is hard to explain. The pleasure of walking down the street in sunlight and gentle air brought tears to my eyes then, and it still does sometimes. I want to tell people who are afraid to feel the painful parts of life, that on the other side of grief is a deep and wide joy that is far, far more powerful than any Happy Story you could push yourself to buck up and tell. And so is a greater capacity to take life-saving action.

Whatever it means to you, I believe healing is another dynamic that can take place on any scale. On a global one, we have the technology, energy, and resources necessary to stabilize systems, if we give attention to where the world is hurting, and distribute resources intelligently. And where nature will do a better job of healing itself, we understand the behavior required of us to let that take its course. During this pandemic time, life is giving us abundant warnings, and we have that rare gift of a window of time during which we can listen and take massive action to save lives. If it is quietly, honestly difficult for you to conceive of how that matters, I forgive you. Just like I forgive myself for the times I thought my own life didn’t matter. Life matters. We have been taught otherwise. But we all know, deep down, regardless of religion or industry, education or trauma, that if for nothing else we are here to cherish life. When we’re awake, we know this. And lucky for us, the way home isn’t as far away as we have strayed.

As the people on my Red Line car slowly realized the derailed train was ours, we peered out the open doors to see the rear two cars leaning precariously to one side, three stories above the ground. And instead of panicked pandemonium, we looked around at each other. We introduced ourselves. Without any instruction from our conductor, without any effective leadership, we decided through conversation not to hop down onto the tracks in case the third rail was still live. We also gently moved to sit on the opposite side of our car to give more weight to the side of the train that wasn’t leaning. Some people walked to the ends of our car to open doors and pass along word of our derailment and suggest the same arrangement. The reporters on the fire escapes eventually put down their cameras but stayed, seeming more interested in simply keeping us company.

There was a soft, glowy afternoon light while we sat and waited. Aware of the problem, doing what we could to take care, cooperating well. Bird songs, breeze. We talked and listened to strangers. Acknowledged fear. People shared their phones with those who didn’t have them, or whose batteries had died. At one point, a guy wearing big puffy headphones had “Man in the Mirror” by Michael Jackson playing loudly so everyone could hear it. And one by one, the people in our car started singing along from the beginning. “Gonna make a change — ah! — for once in my life…” More and more people chimed in until our whole train car was singing the chorus together. (I know that song is a bit tainted now, but it was a pretty great human moment, anyway.)

After a couple hours, an empty train pulled up alongside ours and we were all told to walk a skinny plank, 30 feet above the ground, to board it. And people were still calm. No one panicked, no one pushed, no one screamed. Everyone helped. Even though no one in charge had trusted us enough to tell us the truth, life took care of life. As each person walked the plank, someone on the derailed train reached as far as they could until they had to let go of the walking person’s hand and then, after taking just a few steps alone in the air, another person was there waiting in the empty car, reaching out a hand to receive them.

If you’re reading this, I love you. Maybe that sounds funny, but I think it’s what’s necessary, and more apparently, what’s true. We’re all on this El-train together. If it falls, we all fall. In this pandemic situation we’re in, it’s becoming extra clear that the better we take care of our own lives, the better we take care of life around us, and vice-versa. I have compromised immunity like people you already know and love. And so what you do right now will affect my life as much as it will affect the lives of your loved ones. And what I do will affect yours. The better we are at cooperating, the more of a non-event the whole thing will be. I like what Tara Smith, an epidemiologist at Kent State, says about succeeding at preventative action: “It’s the paradox of public health: when you do it right, nothing happens.” If we all walk off the train calmly, it won’t fall over and make the news.

Find small and inconsequential ways to practice listening to your life and letting it guide you, and it will start lighting up again.

If you want to use this time of social distancing to reconnect with your own life force a bit, there are some nice resources. I like this one, and this one, and this one, and this one. But maybe best is just to practice listening. There’s a knowing thing in you that turns toward life, like a flower that gently bends its face towards the sun. Maybe try sitting in the sun with your eyes closed, and ask your life what it wants, without demanding an answer. If it’s safe, go outside and take a walk by yourself, and make every choice about which way you turn based on nothing but desire. Not habit, memory, or rationale. Give the gentle, fierce, joyful, mysterious, natural life inside you the chance to want things, and to have them. Find small and inconsequential ways to practice listening to your life and letting it guide you, and it will start lighting up again. Be patient. It has been patient with you all this time.