The Galaxy S20 Ultra is Samsung’s biggest Android phone, and its most daring sales pitch: you can own the world’s most advanced 5G phone with massive camera specs... if you’re prepared to spend more money than ever on a non-foldable smartphone.

The Ultra is designed for early adopters, and three things stand out: it has a massive 6.9-inch display with next-gen fluid-scrolling tech that will stretch your hand; five cameras to capture 108MP photos, 40MP selfies and 8K video, and 5G antennas with peak speeds 66 times as fast as 4G LTE.

It's a nice jump from the Galaxy S10 and S10 Plus cameras, although issues with inconsistent autofocus and overexposure keep the Ultra from being the best camera phone. Even with a camera software update, we still find the Galaxy S20 and S20 Plus to be better in most non-zoom scenarios.

Read our Samsung Galaxy S20 review
Read our Samsung Galaxy S20 Plus review
And one for luck: read our hands-on Galaxy Z Flip review
The cameras specs do shine for far-off subjects. The 48MP telephoto lens allowed us to get up close and personal thanks to an impressive variety of zoom lenses. It far surpasses the 2x optical and 10x digital zoom of previous Samsung phones, and the limited 8x digital zoom on the Google Pixel 4 – although 100x zoom snaps were hardly Instagram-worthy, 30x zoom looked fine on a tripod.


Samsung's 'single-take mode' helps you answer an everyday question: should I take photos or a video?

Take both. Its new ‘single-take mode’ captures a variety of shots over a 10-second span: photos, ultra-wides, portraits, hyperlapse video, regular video, and so on. It kept us out of the settings menus and in the moment, plus you can also clip 33MP photos from video, which proved handy.

Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra(Image credit: Future)
The S20 Ultra has a monster spec list: 12GB or 16GB of RAM and 128GB or 512GB of internal storage kick things off.

There’s also a huge 5,000mAh battery for pulling down battery-intensive 5G signal, although we found it could only last more than 24 hours in 4G mode. There in-screen fingerprint sensor from last year’s phones, but it sadly is the first S phone without a 3.5mm headphone jack.



It’s impossible to justify the Galaxy S20 Ultra price for everyone – even those who bought the S9 Plus or S10 Plus, and intended to get the next ‘big one’ from Samsung.

For others, though, the word ‘upgrade’ means a completely different thing: they want a phone that pushes new boundaries, and they don’t mind if that pushes the price tag further into Galaxy Fold territory.

The Galaxy S20 Ultra is Samsung’s own version of Tesla’s ‘Ludicrous Mode’ in its electric cars, and even if the camera is a bit overhyped and inconsistent at the moment, early adopters will love showing off how its cameras go from 0.5x to 100x zoom real quick.

Update: We went back and tested the Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra with its much-needed post-launch camera update. The new software helps, but doesn't completely fix the autofocus and overexposure woes we experienced in March 2020. On top of that, the S20 and S20 Plus took better photos.

Want to find out more about how we found the S20 Ultra? Read on below:

Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra release date and price

US, Australia release date: March 6; UK release date: March 13
128GB + 12GB of RAM: $1,399 / £1,199 / AU$1,999
512GB + 16GB of RAM: $1,599 / £1,399 / AU$2,249
The Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra release date was Friday, March 6 in the US and Australia, and March 13 in the UK, alongside the S20 and S20 Plus.

The S20 Ultra costs a staggering $1,399 / £1,199 / AU$1,999, which is more than any non-foldable smartphone we've tested in the past – and that price is just for the version with 128GB of internal storage and 12GB of RAM.

Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra(Image credit: Future)
If you feel like you may need 512GB of onboard storage and a mind-boggling 16GB of RAM, the S20 Ultra price jumps to $1,599 / £1,399 / AU$2,249. Sadly, there's no 256GB version in between, which most people who shoot video may want.

Some good news, though: you’re not going to need to max-out the storage, given our ever-accelerating move to the cloud and the fact that 5G connectivity will allow you to easily pull down remotely stored data.

Plus, all models of the S20 have a microSD slot for expanding the storage by up to 1TB in case you do hit the built-in capacity.

Display and overall size

6.9-inch AMOLED display with fluid-looking 120Hz refresh rate
120Hz option only works at Full HD+ to save battery life
This is a tall phone, though not as wide as the 6.8-inch Note 10 Plus
Samsung’s 6.9-inch display will push the boundaries of your fingers’ reach and your thumb’s dexterity, yet it won’t feel much bigger than the S10 Plus – its width is actually a tad smaller than the 6.8-inch Note 10 Plus and 6.7-inch Galaxy S10 5G.

It’s just that the Galaxy S20 Ultra is noticeably taller, not wider, expanding to a 20:9 aspect ratio. You can still grip it with one hand, and shove it in a deep-enough jeans pocket – just know that you’ll have to operate it with two hands to comfortably touch all corners of the display. It’s big; just not as big as its 6.9-inch screen suggests.

We found the Super AMOLED display to be bright and pixel-dense at its 3200 x 1440 QHD resolution, yet also look perfectly fine at the default Full HD+ resolution. The lower resolution saves battery life and – spoiler – it’s the only resolution at which you can experience the 120Hz screen refresh rate; that’s not QuadHD-compatible yet.

That's okay – we tended to favor Full HD+ with 120Hz turned on rather than dialing the refresh rate back down to 60Hz. Samsung matches pure gaming phones like the Asus ROG Phone 2 and Razer Phone 2 with this refresh rate, and the screen fluidity makes playing fast-paced games, and even just scrolling through Instagram, feel nicer.

Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra(Image credit: Future)
We appreciate that Samsung found a way to make a smaller punch-hole for its front-facing camera in the top-center of the screen, and selfies actually look better than before – and say goodbye to that wide dual-lens selfie camera from the S10 Plus, as there’s only one camera embedded in this display.

Software handled the depth detection fine, which casts doubt on why you need a depth camera on the back of the Ultra and the Plus.

We were consistently wowed by the Ultra's screen-to-body ratio, brightness levels and support of display standards such as HDR10+, offsetting our often cumbersome handling of this massive phone. It's worth it if you want today's best smartphone display, and aren't secretly wishing that the rumored iPhone 9 ushers in iPhone SE era sizes.

Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra(Image credit: Future)
Design

You get just two Ultra colors: Cosmic Gray and Cosmic Black
Less screen curve, but accidental touches persist
The camera bump and 1mm of extra girth aren't a bother
The Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra is made of glass and aluminum – there’s no ceramic version this year – and comes in just two colors: Cosmic Gray and Cosmic Black. The Cloud Blue color is exclusive to the S20 and S20 Plus, while Cloud Pink is an option with the smaller S20 size, which is a shame for Ultra owners who want some extra flash.

There’s still a curve on the right and left edges of the screens, though it’s much less pronounced compared to past S phones. Sadly, that doesn't mean fewer accidental presses of the nearly bezel-less screen – Samsung still doesn't have excellent palm rejection software, so when we touched the edges with our grip and tried to press the shutter button in the camera app, the phone constantly thought we were trying to activate multi-touch and zoom in, instead of performing single press of a button. Palm creep is very real on this phone.


We’ve talked about the tall-not-wide dimensions (166.9mm x 76mm), so now let’s talk about the girth and weight. At 8.8mm, the Ultra is noticeably thicker than the other S20 phones and all of the S10 phones (those range from 7.8mm to 7.9mm), and it has a sizable rear camera bump on top of that. Both are completely okay with us.

Samsung Galaxy S20 UltraThe Galaxy S20 Plus next to the S20 Ultra (Image credit: Future)
It’s also heavier at 220g (roughly in between the S10 Plus at 175g and the Galaxy Fold at 276g). But again, to us, this is a completely favorable trade-off given the fast 5G mmWave technology, 108MP camera, and 5,000mAh battery that are packed into this cutting-edge smartphone.

Too many times, camera team leads from various phone makers have told TechRadar “we would’ve fit in a better camera, but the design team won” – that’s a direct quote from one of them.

The Galaxy S20 Ultra, thankfully, doesn’t sacrifice camera quality in order to look extra chic. It’s big, but it looks stylish enough – and more people will see your glorious 108MP photos than your phone anyway.

Samsung Galaxy S20 UltraIf you're going to test, test properly...
Five cameras

108MP main camera lets you crop into photos while minimizing quality loss
Most 108MP shots we took ended up having autofocus and overexposure issues
The 100x zoom is a neat party trick, but not Instagram-worthy; 10x is where the magic happens
The is the best selfie camera, but not the best camera – at least not with the current software
Update: As promised, we went back are thoroughly tested this phone's camera with the newest software following our initial in-depth Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra camera test. There are changes, but they didn't move the needle enough to change our review verdict.

We could write a whole review of the Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra’s cameras, there’s so much to say about them – and that’s good news if you want something fresh out of your smartphone’s photos, but bad news if you want the best photos with every snap.

It’s Samsung’s biggest camera sensor upgrade since the Galaxy S7 and S7 Edge, yet we found the hyped-up 108MP camera mode captures photos that don't look much different than snaps taken in the main camera's default 12MP mode.

However, the the extra-large pictures do offer the ability to crop in without as much quality loss. It makes sense for the same reason recording 8K video is often a good idea even if you don’t own anything more than a 4K TV: you can crop and edit without sacrificing detail. It gives you creative latitude, even if you ultimately output to a 12MP photo and 1080p video.